ababa brr; it’s cold 
Ababa qinganax̂ malgakux̂. Brr, it is cold!
achxul give away food; share 
achxux̂tal to give a share 
achxux̂taasal give away, share 
Isux̂ waaĝaasakuq anĝaĝinas achxul angaliq. When I brought in a seal, I shared it with the people.
achx̂il let be; think or say to be 
Hamang al achx̂iqang akux̂ manaĝulax ax̂takux̂. I thought that he was there but he wasn’t.
achixal teach 
Uchiitilax̂ achixal hiing akux̂ ukux̂takuq. I see a teacher teaching there. 
Uchinikas txidix achixal qanagzas. The students learn throughout the winter.
achixaasal teach something 
Unangax̂ achixaasal angaliq. I taught Aleut today.
achixaaluĝix̂ school 
Achixaaluĝim ilan achixanax̂ akux̂. The teacher is in the school.
achixanax̂ teacher 
Achixanax̂ achixaaluĝim ilan akux̂. The teacher is in the school.
achixaqax̂ student 
Achixaqax̂ achixaaluĝim ilan unguchikux̂. The student is sitting at the desk. 
achixs fall 
achigil pitch 
achigidgul fall, cause to fall (several) 
Asxinux̂ hingulgal akux̂ haang achigil saĝanax̂. Yesterday when the girl was shoved she fell down.
achilix̂ little finger 
Achiling adulakax̂. My little finger is short.
achul feel cold 
achunal windy 
achunax̂ wind 
Achunakux̂ uma. It is windy. 
Achunax̂ ixsaaĝutakux̂. The wind has calmed down again. 
Hlax̂ achukux̂. The boy is cold.
adaaĝal come ashore 
Chngatux̂ uchixs angalikum adaaĝal ax̂takux̂. The sea otter went out swimming and came back to shore.
adaxs to roast 
adagil to roast 
Ulux̂ unaaluĝim qusan adagikux̂. Meat is roasting over the fire.
adax̂ father; father’s brother; priest 
Adax̂ sunam kugan waaĝakux̂. The priest came on the boat. 
adulal lie 
adaluusal fool; deceive 
Txin adaluusakuq. I’m fooling you. 
Hlax̂ adalul tunux̂takux̂. The boy is telling a lie.
adgayux̂ pink salmon 
Adgayux̂ chiĝanam qaa akux̂ alaĝum ilan azax̂. Salmon is a fresh water fish but stays in the sea. 
Adgayux̂ higitikux̂. The pink salmon jumped.
adgilax earthquake 
adgilgix̂ earthquake 
adgilaxs tremble by earthquake (the ground) 
Amgaax adgilaxs amaxsix̂. There was an earthquake last night.
adigal bright; shine 
Laampax adigal atakux̂. The lamp is shining brightly. 
adix̂ lower lip 
Adix̂ alqux̂ ax̂? What is the lower lip?
adux̂ cave 
adulĝil put in a cave 
Hingan tanam kugan adux̂ anaa qamdazax̂. The cave on that island is very deep.
adux̂ debt 
aduĝix̂ debtor 
Ting adukuq. I am buying on credit.
adul long 
adulakan short 
Ayx̂aasii adukux̂. His boat is long.
adutal keep long 
Hlax̂ imliin adutakux̂. The boy keeps his hair long.
adutil make long 
Tayaĝum inglaakungis txidix adutikus. The man’s beard is getting long. 
adutichx̂il allow to lengthen 
Asxinux̂ imliin adutichx̂ikux̂. The girl allows her hair to get long.
aduugamax̂sikux̂ too long 
Imyaĝix̂ aduugamax̂sikux̂. The fishline is too long.
aduutal as long as 
Iklas txidix aduutakus. The logs are the same length.
aga over there 
agan that one over there 
agaax from over there
agaanul to go across (bay, river) 
Hlax̂ agaanul angalii txin waaĝatikux̂. The boy who went across came back. 
agangudaĝan towards the other side 
Tayaĝux̂ agangudaĝan huyakux̂. The man is going towards the other side.
agacha he, she, it, they in particular, rather; more 
agach rather, more 
Agacha tukukux̂. He is rather rich.
agal go away 
agachx̂il lead away 
agaĝal depart from 
agax̂tal move away for a while 
Kuusxix̂ plitam chidaĝaan agal angalix̂. The cat moved away from the stove.
agalitil hit behind 
Isux̂ kalul akux̂ agalitinax̂. He shot and hit behind the seal.
agalim the rear 
Agalim hadaa ukuda. Look towards the rear.
agalikul to be too late 
Agalikul txin waaĝatikux̂. It came here too late
agalmudax̂s move backwards; go to the rear (a boat) 
Sunax̂ agalmudaĝan ayx̂akux̂. The boat is moving backwards.
agaluuĝix̂ being or coming behind; later 
Hlax̂ agaluuĝil aygagikux̂. The boy is coming from the rear.
agalux̂ tooth 
agalus teeth 
Qanaang agalus matax̂t? How many teeth do you have?
agamaxchix̂ a small kind of rorqual, possibly a little piked whale (balaenoptera acutorostrata) 
Agamaxchix̂ kalukuq. I shot a whale.
agamgix̂ red chiton 
Agamgis kugan agamgis ukunaq. I found red chiton on Agamgis.
agas to take away; wash away by a wave 
agatil to wash away 
Hanĝis iklax̂ agas hulal ax̂takux̂. The waves washed away the log last night.
agayal to try to take away 
Quganalĝux̂ ulang achidagaan agayakuq. I am trying to take away the big rock.
agdaaĝix̂ vertebrae; backbone 
Piitram agdaaĝii itikux̂. Peter has a slipped disc.
agidusix̂ comb 
Agidusix̂ sux̂tal imliin singlakux̂. He/She is combing his/her hair. 
agiicha another; some 
anĝaĝinam agiicha another person 
agiitingis other persons 
agiichigaan sometimes 
Hix̂tanangin agiitingis tutakung. I understand some of what he says.
agiidal visit
agiidax̂ guest 
agiidax̂tal have as guest; entertain 
Ingachiĝix̂ agiidakux̂. The couples are visiting.
agiital be together with; accompany; take along 
agiitaatunazax̂ easy to get along with 
agiitagaa the other; another 
Braatang agiital ayuxtazaq. I usually go out in a boat with my brother.
agil open; become open
agidgil be wide open 
agidgul open several 
Dangis agidgikux̂. His eyes are wide open.
agix̂tal to open 
Agix̂tal chuqaan ukux̂tachx̂ida. Open your mouth and let me see your throat.
Txin saxtanil ii agil hingamax̂t? Why are you yawning, are you lazy? 
agilĝix̂ mouth 
Qawam agalĝii angunakux̂. The sea lion’s mouth is big.
agis to spread 
agitil to open, comb 
Maaslax̂ xliibam kugan agis qalgazax̂. We spread butter on bread then eat it.
agisax̂ lookout; observation hill 
agisaĝil look around from observation hill. 
agisax̂tal use as lookout hill.
Tayaĝux̂ agisam kangan akux̂. There is a man on the lookout hill.
agitaadaa his partner; his fellow; his friend; the other one 
agitaadas plural form 
ayx̂aasim agitaadaa the other boat 
Agitaadas matalgaa iĝamanazax̂. It is good to have friends.
aglal gather (grass); haul (water) 
Agach taangax̂ aglal ax̂taaĝutakux̂. The boy is helping haul water. 
Taangax̂ chiĝanam ilagaan aglal qilax̂sis. We hauled water from the river this morning.
aglux̂ killer whale 
Aglus qas qakus. The killer whales are eating fish. 
aguĝadgix̂ outgoing tide (pass) ebbtide 
Aguĝadgix̂ txin ayx̂atikux̂. The flood tide is starting.
aguĝaĝil to look for food at the beach 
aguĝilĝux̂ low tide 
Aguĝaĝil qilax̂sis. We went looking for sea food this morning.
aguĝnax̂ sea urchin 
Qahngus quchigingin aguĝnas akus. There are sea urchins among the seaweeds. 
agul make; manufacture; build; produce; bring forth 
Isx̂atix̂ agukux̂. She is making a basket. 
Nivzuuruf ulax̂ agul inatiqalikux̂. He’s almost through building his house. 
Andrii ulax̂ agul inatikux̂. Andrew finished the house he was building. 
aguĝil made 
Isxax̂ aguĝil ii? Is the bed made?
agux̂ tide; part of the beach which is left dry during low tide 
aguĝix̂ tide 
Aguĝix̂ aĝakux̂. The tide is going out. 
agux̂tal make; arrange temporarily 
agulal make several 
Slachxizax̂ agux̂tal ukutikux̂. It has been nice weather lately.
Aguuĝux̂ God 
Tanam aguuĝuu czar (god of the earth) 
aguuĝux̂tal act as a god 
Aguuĝux̂ Kamgam ulagan ilan Kamgaalazax̂. We pray to God in the church.
axchigal move fast 
axchigalakan to be slow 
Ayx̂aasix̂ axchigal ayx̂akux̂. The boat is going fast.
axis drag; catch by dragging 
axitil to drag 
axital have caught by dragging; hold around 
Chagix̂ axis qilax̂siq. I caught a halibut this morning.
axs to pass; move along; go by or through; spend or pass over; (a term); elapse (of time) 
agmigdal make repeated movement along 
agulal be passed over with 
agusal pass with 
axchx̂il let pass 
axsxal be passed 
axtal pass by 
Sisxix̂ agnas. They crossed the pass. 
Kuu axsxaakalakax̂. One cannot pass over it. 
Tanax̂ axsxal umaanulgazax̂. One has to pass over the land to get across to the other side. 
Igax̂tax̂ hawan axtal igax̂takux̂. The airplane passed by here.
axsal get a hole in it 
axsagnax̂ hole 
axsax̂tal have a hole in it 
Bruudnaa axsakux̂. His boot has a hole in it. 
axsil put a hole in it 
Baankix̂ axsil akux̂ ilagaan taangax̂ hyuqalinax̂. When he put a hole in the can, water started pouring out.
aĝadgix̂ sun 
aĝadax̂s sunshine 
Aĝadgix̂ agiichigaan uluudazax̂. The sun is sometimes red. 
Aĝadgix̂ akinakux̂. The sun is hot.
aĝal to be born or uncovered; to be brought somewhere 
aĝax̂tal to be opened; uncovered (tide); to have been born; to go somewhere for some time 
Agux̂ aĝakux̂. It is low tide now.
ax̂diikax̂ ptarmigan 
Aĝdiikax̂ qan’gim aslaan quhmazax̂. Ptarmigan are white during winter. 
Aĝdiikax̂ igax̂tal aguun axchigazax̂. When the, ptarmigan flies, it flies fast. 
aĝiisal leave; let go 
aĝiilal be left 
aĝix̂taasal be left for the time being 
Txin aĝiisal. He left.
aĝil go give 
Alqux̂ ngus aĝil anuxtakat? What do you think she is giving me?
aĝlaayax̂ Redbreasted Merganser (waterfowl) 
aĝlaayam quhmaa American Merganser 
Aĝlaayax̂ angunakux̂. The merganser is big.
aĝlul to bail 
aĝluusix̂ bailer; dipper; ladle 
Chiĝanam ilagaan taangax̂ aĝlul angalix̂. He bailed or fetched some water from the creek. 
aĝus conceal; hide; 
aĝuchaĝil be hidden 
aĝudgul to hide several 
aĝutal keep hidden 
aĝutaasal to hide with 
aĝutichx̂il let hide 
Uuquchiingix̂ quganas quchigingis txin aĝus angalix̂. The fox hid among the rocks today.
ax̂s put; place; give 
aĝil put; place; give 
aĝzal to give habitually; deliver 
ax̂sxal be given 
ax̂sxadax̂ tribute 
Kanfiixtax̂ hlamaan aĝil angaliq. I gave the boy some candy.
ax̂tal apparently be; have been; blow from some direction (wind) 
naa-ax̂tax̂ west wind 
Haqal ax̂takux̂. He has come.
ax̂tal have put; have (somewhere); give; have been 
ax̂tux̂s put or give to several; distribute 
Ayx̂aasing ngaan ax̂tal angaling. I loaned him my boat today. 
ax̂tagalikux̂ although 
Saĝal ax̂tagalikux̂ umlatida. Even though he is sleeping, wake him up.
aka straight out there 
akan that one out there 
akan ulax̂ the house straight out there 
Akan ulax̂ amaatxakux̂. That house is far from here.
akaaĝigan beyond 
akaanul go further; proceed 
akaanux̂tal proceed; continue along 
akangudaĝan forward; ahead 
Sunax̂ akangudaĝan txin ayx̂atikux̂. The ship moves forward.
akalux̂ road; path  
Akaluĝix̂ qaniixtukux̂. The road has lots of snow.
akaluĝim ayx̂aasii car; road traveller 
Akaluĝim ayx̂aasigan nagan ayx̂aatuzaq. I like to ride in a car. 
akangaa the ceiling (of house) roof (of cave) 
sam akangaa palate 
Ulam akangaa hakaatxakux̂. The ceiling in the house is high.
akayux̂ straight; pass between islands 
akayuĝil: unangangin akayuĝil have sounds between them (islands) 
Akayum anuu iĝanakux̂. The current at the pass is rough.
akix̂ price 
akii its price 
akil pay; repay 
akichx̂il sell 
akiĝilakan have no price 
akix̂tal have as a price; cost 
akix̂taasal offer 
akiisal pay 
akilachx̂il sell several 
akitul be expensive 
akitulakan be cheap 
Tayaĝux̂ akil angaliq. I paid the man today.
akiiĝasal carry with him; take along 
akiiĝalal be taken along 
Saygis akiiĝalal ayuxtalgazax̂. We usually take our guns along when we go out in the boat. 
akiix̂cha limit; border 
akiix̂tingis plural 
Ulam akiix̂cha umnalakax̂. The border of the house is drafty.
akiital as far as; until 
Tayaĝux̂ wan akiitis hamang awazax̂. The man still works there at that place today.
akinal hot 
akinax̂ heat 
akinax̂ malgakux̂ It is hot.
akinax̂sil be out in hot weather, feel hot 
Piichix̂ akinakux̂. The oven is hot.
akinam hadaa lee side 
Akinamudaĝan ayx̂akuq. I am sailing with a fair wind.
aku over there (to the side) 
akungudaĝan off that way 
Akungudaĝan huyakux̂. It goes off in that way.
al be; be somebody or something; be somewhere or in some position; be so or on the contrary. 
Hatim ataqan al hamang akus. There are eleven there.
alaadax̂ porpoise 
Alaadax̂ axchigal uchigizax̂. The porpoise swims fast.
alaadikas fried dough 
Anaan alaadikas unal ii? Is your Mother cooking fried dough?
alax two 
alaxs make or get two 
algidim twice 
algim a second time 
Itx̂aygis alagnas. We shot two reindeer. 
Ataqan ama ataqan alax ax̂. One plus one is two. 
algidim hatix̂ twenty 
Hatix̂ ama hatix̂ algidim hatix̂ ax̂. Ten plus ten is twenty. 
alaĝux̂ ocean; sea; saltwater 
alaĝulĝil put into the sea 
alaĝulil go into the sea 
alaĝuhmiiĝil choppy sea; starting to get rough 
Yas hangadingis txidix alaĝulĝil. The top of the reefs go under the water.
alaĝum igax̂taa float plane 
Alaĝum igax̂taa uhlii Atx̂ax̂ hnux̂tazax̂. Only sea planes come to Atka.
alax̂ whale 
Alax̂ ataqadim tanam algaa anax̂. The whale was once a land animal.
alal want; need; be at a loss 
alanal be needed 
alanatalakan have enough of 
alanil need 
alatalakan have plenty 
Hlax̂ ayx̂aasim alax kulisax̂taa alakux̂. The boy wants a bicycle.
alangax̂ cottonwood 
alangaĝis cottonwoods 
Alangaĝis suĝal baliikas agulgazax̂. Cottonwood is used for making smoked salmon.
algax̂ animal (mammals in general) 
alganaax̂s hunt (sea) mammals 
alganaax̂snikas hunters 
Alganaax̂snikas ayuglakus. The hunters are going out.
algax̂sim ukinaa butcher knife 
Algax̂sim ukinaa chuqudazaĝulax. A butcher knife is not small.  
alĝinal inapproachable; not ready; difficult 
Malgaa alĝinakux̂. It is hard to do.
alĝul behave; feel awe 
alĝunil: txin alĝunikux̂ he repents; sorry for what he did 
Alĝul hingamax̂t? Do you feel awe?
alixs overflow 
Chaasxix̂ imdakung alixs stuuluĝim hangadan hyunax̂. When I filled the cup it overflowed over the table. 
aliĝngix̂ wolf 
Aliĝngix̂ uuquchiingim ilagaan angunax̂. A wolf is larger than a fox.
alix̂ old man 
aliĝis the elders 
Alix̂s: txin alix̂tikux̂. He is starting to get old.
alix̂siisix̂ leptarrhena pyrolifolia (medical plant) 
Alix̂siisis saaqudgim aslaan malgazax̂. Alix̂siisis are found in the summer.
alimax̂ leg; sea lion flipper 
Qawam alimangis angunazas. The sea lion flippers are usually big.
alisal visible 
Ukinax̂ alisatalagada. Don’t keep the knife where it is going to be taken.
alitxul make war; attack 
alitxux̂ war; warrior; troop of warriors 
Alitxux̂ inakux̂. The war is over.
alqux̂ what? 
alqus plural form 
alqul be or do what; how; why? 
alqutal done how? 
alquusal do (why) 
Alqus hix̂tal hingamax̂t? What are you saying?
alugax̂ the root of black lily 
alugas to pick black lily roots 
alugatil to pick black lilies 
Ayagas alugatikus. The women are gathering roots of black lily. 
aluĝis mail 
Aluĝis waaĝal aguun kiduusamaliix̂t. When the mail arrives, you be sure to help with it. 
aluĝim hugii envelope 
Aluĝim hugigan aduu agach alakuq. I want a long envelope.
aluĝasix̂ writing instrument 
Karandaasix̂ hingay akux̂ aluĝasix̂ ax̂. A pencil is a writing instrument.
aluĝil to write 
Hlax̂ aluĝil saĝanax̂. The boy wrote yesterday.
alux̂ letter 
Kiin wan alux̂ ukaaĝasal? Who brought this letter here?  
Ayx̂aasim alugan angaa umnalakax̂. The boat’s side is leaking.
ahIikux̂ still is 
Ulax̂ hamang ahIikux̂. The house is still there.
amaanul to go away 
Sax̂ uchixs amaanul ukuĝaqadanax̂. The duck swam away until it was nowhere in sight. 
amaanul go away 
amaanuchx̂il send away 
amaanuusal take away
amaa-hadaa far away; out of sight 
amaatxal to be far 
Adaagix̂ waax amaatxakux̂. Adak is far from here. 
amaatxal to be far 
amaatxalakan not far 
amangaa the further side; space behind 
Sunax̂ amaa-hadan aĝakux̂. The ship went out of sight (behind the horizon).
amax̂ul race 
Hlax̂ kingi as amax̂ukux̂. The boy is racing with his brother.
amasukux̂ maybe 
Qilagan anax̂ amasukux̂. Maybe it was yesterday.
amayaknal dirty; worthless 
Tanam chix̂taa amayaknakux̂. The wet ground is dirty.
amduxs squeeze; pinch 
amdugil squeeze; pinch 
Aangsus amdugiI taangangis iguIgazax̂. We squeeze the fruit juice out. 
Tayaĝux̂ chang amdugil natnax̂. The man hurt my hand by squeezing it.
amgaadax̂ walrus 
Amgaadax̂ alaĝum qinganagan ilan azax̂. Walrus live in cold waters.  
amgix̂ night 
amaxs do last night 
Amgix̂ masxakux̂. Night has come.
amgix̂s watch; keep guard 
amgiĝnax̂ watchman 
Amgiĝnax̂ qayaam kangan akux̂. The watchman is standing on his hill.
amgix̂sil pretty; beautiful; fancy 
Asxinux̂ amgix̂sikux̂. The girl is pretty.
amxix̂ flesh of fish 
Qam amxii aqitikux̂. She takes off the flesh from the fish.
amĝil fight 
amĝiisal to fight with 
Chilus amĝikus. The birds are fighting. 
Kiinkux akux amĝil hamamax? Who are the two fighting?
Amilaayus American 
Amilaayas American 
Amilaayal speak English 
Amilaayas algax̂. We are Americans.
amilĝix̂ fishing place; place out on the sea where one gets fish. 
Piitram amilĝii chagis alazaĝulax. Peter's fishing place has lots of halibut.
amnax̂s flows; runs (stream) 
amnaĝalal float 
Chiĝanax̂ amnax̂s utikux̂. The river flows downstream.
amnixs to throw; fling 
amnixtaasal to throw continuously 
Hlax̂ alaĝum achidan amnigikux̂. The boy is throwing rocks down by the beach. 
Quganas amnixtaasaqadada. Quit throwing rocks.
amnil tight; tightly closed 
amniyal to close; lock (the door) 
Qahmigix̂ amniyakux̂. He locked the door. 
Amrikaanchix̂ American 
Amrikaanchix̂ aadal tunux̂takux̂. He is speaking English or American.
amtal: txin amtakux̂ to feel sorry for oneself 
Saĝaqadaam txin amtanax̂. After oversleeping, he felt badly.
Amtatux̂ sam axchigaa ax̂. The pintail is a very fast duck. 
Amtatum hitxii adukux̂. The pintail's tail is long.
amux̂ article of clothing; dress 
amus article of clothing; dress (plural form) 
Asxinux̂ amux̂ chux̂takux̂. The girl is wearing a dress. 
amulinal to make noise; be loud 
Amulinal tunux̂takux̂. He talks loudly.
ahmaatiknax̂ splinter; shavings of wood 
Hyaagam ahmaatiknangis anida. Light the shavings.
ahmas to ask 
ahmayaax̂s ask about; try to find out 
ahmayaax̂tal ask; ask about 
Alqux̂ ahmayaax̂tal? What did he ask?
ahmiĝa around there; that region 
Wayaam sas ahmiĝangis axsxaduukalakaĝis. Nowadays you can't get near those ducks.
anax club; stick 
anagix̂ club; stick 
anagasal to hit with 
anamixtal to hit (several) with a stick 
anagil to bat 
Hmiichix̂ ama qam ngaan anax malgax̂. That is a bat (club) for both ball and fish. 
Hmiichix̂ anagiI amaatxa ngaan hnuchx̂ikux̂. His hit sent the ball far. 
anax̂ that is (it); something; anything; somebody; anybody 
anaĝix̂ something; anything 
Tachim anax̂ atxazalakaq. I haven't caught anything yet. 
anaĝitalakan have got nothing; be empty 
anaĝitxaĝilakan get nothing (as when fishing)
anax̂ mother 
anang my mother 
Asxinum anaa awakux̂. The girl's mother is working.
anatix̂ property mark 
Iklax̂ anatilĝikuq. I put a mark on the driftwood. 
an'gaaglakan do not mind; not worry 
an'gaagasalakan do not mind; take no offense 
Tayaĝux̂ ting an'gaagasalakax̂. The man doesn't mind me.
an'gix̂ intestines; guts; state of mind 
aan'gichikaadal think; ponder 
aan'gichikaadaasal think over 
an'gilugil worry 
an'gital have in mind; think of; wish 
an'gizigalakan be uneasy; discomforted 
an'gizigax̂talakan be uneasy with; frightened of 
Qawam an'gingis anuusada. Throw the sea lion intestines away. 
Aniqdux̂ hingan tayaĝux̂ an'gizigax̂talakax̂. The child is frightened of the man.
anĝil breathe; take breath; rest 
anĝida take a break 
Anĝilakan agumis asx̂aamis aĝnax̂t. If you don't breathe you will die. 
anĝaĝixta live (a life) 
anĝaĝiikal be healthy
anĝaĝiisal live on 
anĝaĝinax̂ somebody; person (homo sapiens) 
anĝaĝinaagamagis grown-up people 
anĝaĝinaĝil have people in it 
anĝaĝinalgux giant 
Isuĝix̂ anĝaĝil ii? Is the seal alive? 
Anĝaĝinalĝux̂ anĝaĝinakuchax̂ sux̂takux̂. A giant is holding a small person. 
anĝaĝital keep alive 
anĝidgaĝil scream 
anĝilax̂sil be short of breath; lack of air 
Anĝaĝinas alanalakaĝis. There are lots of people in this world.
anĝisikux̂ to rest 
Awal txin kayuĝasal angalikux̂ mal anĝisikux̂. She's been working very hard today so she's resting.
anĝusix̂ nose 
Anĝusiin kahnulida. Blow your nose. 
Anĝusix̂ sux̂tal umtalgazax̂. The nose is used for smelling.
anil light (fire) 
anix̂tal have a thing burning 
Unaaluĝix̂ anida. Light the bonfire. 
aniqdux̂ child 
aniqdux̂il have a child 
Maamas aniqdux̂ matazas. Mothers have babies. 
Aniqdus alaĝum achidan chugum kugan mikakus. The children are playing by the beach on the sand.
anqal stand up; rise to his feet; set out; depart 
anqaasal stand up with; rise with 
anqax̂tal stand; be in right position; go away for awhile 
anqas place right side up; erect 
Hlax̂ anqax̂takux̂. The boy is standing. 
anuxtal have in mind; think of; desire; want; wish 
anuxtaasal think; wonder; want; hope that 
Saĝal anuxtal angaling. I thought he or she was sleeping.
anul flow; stream 
anux̂ current; tide 
Anux̂ kayutukux̂. The current is strong. 
anul throw 
Kayutul anul agumis mikaqadaangan aĝikuq. If you throw too hard, I am not going to play with you anymore.
Anulgilax̂ February (hunting of cormorants) 
Anulgilax̂ qan'gim tugidaa ax̂. February is a winter month.
ahnix̂ root of lupine (lupinus nootkatensis) 
Ahnix̂ qalgaa qaatunakux̂. The root of lupine is good to eat.
angaa side; lateral part; the half 
Qam angaa suda. Take half of the fish.
angaachiĝil sing 
Ruuzdistvam aslaan angaachiĝil txidix qaĝatanas. They were happy to sing during Christmas. 
Asxinux̂ angaachiĝikux̂. The girl is singing. 
angaadax̂ thwart 
Hlax̂ angaadam kugan unguchikux̂. The boy is sitting on the thwart.
angada the space beside or in front of it 
Ulam angada anqax̂takux̂. He is standing beside the house.
angadal to wipe (table, dishes) 
Chahmas angadakux̂. She is wiping the dishes. 
angaĝal be added 
angaĝil match 
angaĝix̂ pair 
Sapuuging angaa hikikux̂. My other shoe is lost.
angax̂tal add 
Anaĝix̂ angax̂takux̂. It is mixed with something. 
angax̂taa together with 
Kuufyang saaxarax̂ ngaan angax̂tal taangazaq. I drink my coffee with sugar added.
anglaaĝis gums; gills 
Qam anglaaĝingis uluudazax̂. The gills on the fish are red.
angalix̂ daylight 
angalidigal be bright; light 
angalix̂tal to have as color 
Angalix̂ haqakux̂. Daylight is coming. 
Angalix̂ ama amgix̂ ayuxtanaq. I was out in a boat day and night. 
angamudax̂s go aside; withdraw
angazanal handy; assist; give aid; be profitable 
Hlam angazanaa akux̂. The boy is helpful.
angil start out; come from 
Sunax̂ Adaagim ilagaan angil waagakux̂. The ship came from Adak to here.
anglaax̂ old squaw 
anglaaĝix̂ old squaw 
Anglaaĝix̂ sax̂ akux̂. The old squaw duck is a kind of duck.
anglil to strain oneself 
Txin anglilakan aaĝakux̂t maakaan. You don't have to strain yourself to do it.
angtaa the end; half 
Hyaagam angtaa chutxidigakux̂. The end of the wood is sharp.
angunal big; have much 
Alax̂ angunal aduzax̂. A whale is big and long. 
Ulax̂ angunakux̂. The house is big.
angunatakux̂ haughty 
Asxinukuchax̂ txin angunatakux̂. Is that little girl acting haughty?
ahngakux̂ acknowledge 
Ahmatikung ahngakux̂ awaqalinaq. I asked him first and he acknowledged so I started working. 
ahngax̂tal acknowledge 
Tayaĝux̂ ahngax̂tal akux̂ taaman hlas ayuginas. The man acknowledged the boys before they left in their boats.
apalsiinax̂ orange 
Apalsiinax̂ qaatunazax̂. The oranges are good eating.
Apriilax̂ April 
Apriilax̂ qanikinga tugidaa ax̂. April is a Spring month.
aqadal cease to be; be no more; has already been 
Aniqdux̂ aqadakux̂. He/she isn't a baby anymore.
aqax̂tal be straight 
Chagim dux̂taa aqax̂takux̂. The halibut hook is straight.
aqas stretch 
aqatil stretch 
Ayagax̂ kudut aqatikux̂. The woman stretched her legs. 
aqil become loose or retreat 
Qahmigim hutuu aqikux̂. The door handle came off.
aqlal anger; angry 
Anĝaĝinax̂ aqlal txin ukux̂tachx̂idaĝulax. A person should never show that he is angry.
araamachux̂ bullhead 
kuhyux̂ bullhead 
Araamachux̂ kamgituzax̂. The bullhead's head is large.
as with; together with 
As haqakung. I came with him/her.
asaa his or her name 
asaasal give as a name 
asaĝal be called 
asax̂tal have as a name; be called 
Muyusii asax̂takuq. My name is Moses.
asagax̂ cousin 
Asxinum asagaa ulaĝikux̂. The girl's cousin is home.
asxinux̂ girl 
Asxinum imlii adukux̂. The girl's hair is long. 
asxux̂ nail 
Asxux̂, kugan tadalgaa nanazax̂. To step on a nail is painful.
asxutix̂ post; pole; stake 
Qignam asxutingis sadaadan akus. There are light posts outside.
asxuu or 
asxuunulax or 
amasxuu or 
Ting asxuunulax txin satxax̂ taĝaaĝan ax̂s. Who is going to check the gillnet, you or I?
asx̂aaĝil sick 
Asx̂aaĝil agumis txin agliisazaax̂t. Take care of yourself when you're sick. 
asx̂al die 
asx̂aanas dead; mummies 
asx̂aasal die by 
asx̂ax̂tas the dead 
asx̂alal die in great numbers 
asx̂adgul kill 
asx̂ayal try to kill 
Asx̂ax̂tas qayam kangan akus. The dead are on top of the hill.
asx̂anil to get tired 
Tax̂tikux̂ txin asx̂anil quyunax̂. When it got dark she got tired and went to bed. 
asx̂anix̂takux̂ to get tired 
Hyaagas igaĝil txin asx̂anix̂takux̂. He's getting tired cutting the wood.
asx̂as to kill 
asx̂atil to kill 
Aalikax̂ itx̂aygix̂ asx̂atil angalix̂. Alex killed a reindeer.
asx̂udgix̂ girl (between 8 -17 years old) 
Asx̂udgix̂ saĝakux̂. The girl is sleeping.
asla correspondence; something corresponding or appropriate; time occasion; position or point corresponding to something 
aslangis plural form 
Aslixtaqang. I met him. 
aslixs meet; find 
Tayaĝux̂ umaanuI akux̂ hIax aslixs as tanaaĝanax̂. When a man went hiking he met a boy so they returned together.
asux̂ cooking pot 
Asum suudaaluĝaĝii nagan krupax̂ unakuq. I am cooking rice in the pot with a handle. 
ataasal thought 
achx̂il thought 
Sunax̂ haqal achx̂ikuq. I thought the ship was coming.
atal burn; flame 
Qignax̂ atakux̂. The fire is burning.
atamkux̂ stump 
Atamkux̂ qayakux̂. The stump is tall. 
ataqan one; single; one and the same 
ataqan hlax̂ one boy 
Ataqax̂ continuity; one place 
ataqadim once; at once 
Anaĝiĝulax ama ataqan ataqan ax̂. Zero plus one is one.
atxax̂s be in order; right; correct; just 
atxax̂s, atxax̂til put in order; repair; prepare; make ready 
Masinat atxax̂s akux̂ txin ayx̂atnax̂. When he fixed his motor he started out.
atxazal catch; get hold of 
Piitrax̂ isux̂ atxazal qilax̂six̂. Peter caught a seal this morning.
atxidax̂ codfish 
Atxidax̂ qax̂ ax̂. The codfish is a kind of fish.
atxil: txin atxil stop; it stopped (moving of boat, talking of person) 
Masinas txidix atxikus. The motor stopped.
atxis measure 
Atxitikung. I measured it.
atxulix̂ lower part of human body (from abdomen down) 
Aniqdum atxulii chix̂takux̂. The baby is wet.
atx̂ux̂ toe; finger 
Huzux̂ hatix̂ atx̂us matakux̂. There are ten fingers all together. 
Atx̂ux̂ alqux̂ ax̂? What is a finger?
atx̂um qagalĝingis fingernails 
Atx̂um qagalĝingis alqus as? What are fingernails?
atikux̂ starts to burn 
atxalikux̂ starts to burn 
Plitax̂ atikux̂. The stove starts to burn.
atim-hadaa down; downward direction 
achidaa space below or beside an opening. 
Tayaĝux̂ atim hadan huyakux̂. The man is going downward.
atuung six 
atuungidim six times 
Alax ama siching atuung ax̂. Two and four is six. 
atuung stuuluĝis six tables
awa over there; aside (moving or in relation to moving) 
Awan ukuda. Look over there.
awal work; serve 
Awax̂ work; worker; bond-man; servant; slave 
Ayagas awal amaxsis. The women worked last night.
ayagax̂ woman; female 
ayagaa his wife; his wife's sister 
ayagachxizax̂ pretty woman 
Ayagax̂ taliĝikux̂. The woman is dancing. 
ayaĝil be bashful; ashamed 
ayaĝinal be disrespectful 
Asxinux̂ ayaĝikux̂. The girl is bashful.
ayal fall; tumble down 
ayanax̂ cliff 
Iganas ayal alaĝum achidan hnunas. The rocks fell off the cliffs, rolling toward the beach.
ayangix̂ fog 
ayangitul be fogged in; lie in fog 
Ayangitikux̂. It has become foggy. 
Ayangix̂ qayas ilagaan sakaaĝakux̂. The fog has rolled down from the top of the hills.
aygaxs to walk 
aygagil to walk 
aygagalal be carried 
aygagasal walk with; carry 
Suun'gis ayx̂aasim hadan aygagasal akum itxinax̂. He dropped some supplies while carrying them to his boat. 
Tayaĝux̂ tanax̂ aygaxs haqakux̂. The man is walking across land and is coming here.
ayxax̂ more than 
Hingan ayxax̂ qas matakux̂. He has more fish than that.
ayĝax̂s tremble; shake 
Adgilax malgakux̂ ulas ayĝax̂s iĝananax̂. When there was an earthquake the houses shook.
ayx̂aasix̂ boat 
ayx̂al move at sea; swim (sea mammals); move (reindeer) 
ayx̂aalal be used for boat 
ayx̂aasal take along (boat) 
Ayx̂aasix̂ masinaĝiiyulax akux̂. The boat is without a motor.
ayxaasim alax kuIisax̂taa bicycle 
Ayx̂aasim alax kulisax̂taa akux̂. This is a bicycle.
ayx̂aasim Masinaa outboard motor 
Taatang ayx̂aasigan masinaa six̂til ax̂takux̂. My dad's outboard motor broke.
ayx̂aasim paarusaĝii sailboat 
Ayx̂aasim paarusiĝii ataqadim Atx̂ax̂ hnux̂tanax̂. Once a sailboat came to Atka. 

ayqilakan don't find anything difficult 
ayqinal be difficult 
Hingan tayaĝux̂ anax̂ ayqix̂tazaĝulax. That man never finds anything difficult to do.
ayuxs, ayugil go out; start out; leave (in a boat) 
ayuxchx̂il to send out (mail) 
Sunax̂ ayuxs saĝanax̂. The boat left yesterday.
ayuxtal go out (temporarily) 
Ayx̂aasix̂ ayuxtal aqadaam waaĝakux̂. The boat went out temporarily and came right back.
ayux̂ax̂ lumpfish 
Ayux̂as wayaam ukuĝazaĝulas. We don't see lumpfish anymore.
ayukal be or stay for a long time 
Igax̂tax̂ wang ayukaĝulax. The plane does not stay here for very long.
ayul fall; collapse 
ayus fell 
ayuyal try to turn over 
Ulix̂ ayul akux̂ aqlanax̂. Ulix̂ got angry when he fell. 
ahyux buttocks 
Ahyuum kukin unguchikux̂. He/she is sitting on his/her buttocks.

azaatax̂, azax̂ approximately; about 
azax̂ numbering; amounting to 
Qanan azax̂ isux̂ husii-ax̂s? How many seals will it (boat) take as a load? 
haman azaatax̂ slux̂ about this many years 
Qanan azaatax̂ qas atxazat? Approximately how many fish did you catch?
azal usually be; be each time 
AA
aadal be like; as if
Qugax̂ aadanas ax̂takus. They must have been like devils.
aadil to hurry
aadiisal to hurry with 
aadital in a hurry
Txin aadida. Hurry up.
Qaxchikdatiiĝan kadagaan ting aadil iginaq. I hurried home before it got dark.
aadux loins; lumbar vertebrae
Aaduking nanakux. My loins are aching.
aagax̂tax̂ ready
Qalgadam aagax̂taa hamang akux̂ sul qada. There is food ready there so take some of it.
aagas prepare
aagatil prepare 
Ayx̂aasiin aagatil aqadaam ayugnax̂. He prepared his boat and then he left in his boat.
aagayuux̂ cormorant
Aagauuĝim uyuu adukux̂. The cormmorant's neck is long. 

aaglux̂ slender-billed shearwater
Aaglux̂ haang alaĝum qusan igax̂takux̂. The slender-billed shearwater is flying above the water.
aagil adequate
Ting as txin aagikux̂. He is of the same age or size as me.
Aagustax̂ August
Aagustax̂ saaqudgim tugidaa ax̂. August is a summer month.
aaguzax̂ veritable; true
Hyaagax̂ isinaan aaguzax̂ hitada. Try to keep the lumber you are cutting straight.
aaĝal miss; do in vain
Tayaĝux̂ kalul aaĝal akux̂ kaluqadanax̂. The man shot and missed so he quit shooting.
aaĝdagalikux̂ even though
Txin nas aax̂dagalikux̂ anax̂ anuxtanaĝulax. Even though he hurt himself he didn't care.
aaĝix̂ duck; mallard
Aaĝix tagakux̂. The mallard landed. 
aaĝix̂ liver
aaĝing my liver 
Isuĝim aaĝii qaatunazax̂. A seal liver is good eating.
aax̂uyaakdax̂ wart

Aax̂uyaakdax̂ chang kugan akux̂. There is a wart on my hand.
aaĝuliigix̂ hawk
Aaĝuliigix̂ sam axchigaa ax̂. A hawk is a fast bird. 
aaĝumikaadgix̂ bluefly
Aaĝumikaadgix̂ ulam nagan igax̂takux̂. A bluefly is flying inside the house.
aakal can be; approximate
Hamang aakal anuxtakung. I thought that it could be there.
aalal be done
Qagmangix̂ hamang aalal qalgaqax̂. The goose was consumed there.
aalĝal bare; uncovered
tanam aalĝaa bare ground 
Qachx̂ii aalĝal. His skin is uncovered.
aalĝas uncover; reveal
aalĝatal have uncovered 
Qachx̂iin aalĝas taaman baanada. Tare your clothes off before entering the steam house.
aalĝuudal wade
Hlax̂ alaĝum achidan aalĝuudal kitat chiĝtnikux̂. The boy is getting his feet wet by wading along the shore.
aaliisix̂ landing place
aaliisii his landing place 
Piitram aaliisii iĝamanakux̂. Peter's landing place is good.
aaliyuuknal funny; joke
Aaliyuuknal ii anuxtakat? Do you think it's funny?
aalux̂ swell; big waves

Alaĝum aaluu qayakux̂. The swells are high. 
aalul smile; laugh
aalux̂tal smile 
aalunaazal funny; comical; ridiculous
Tayaĝum ngaan tunux̂takung aaluhlix̂ manax̂. When I talked to the man he just laughed.
aamaxs bleed
aamagnil make bleed 
Atx̂ung chaĝus aamagnil angaliq. I cut my hand and it started bleeding.
aahmaaĝix̂ flower
Aahmaaĝim umtaatunaa ukux̂tanaq. I saw a nice smelling flower.
aanachx̂uudax̂ sight on a fire arm
Aanachx̂uudax̂ alqux̂ ax̂? What is a gun sight?
aanaqliitax̂ sea cucumber
Aanaqliitax̂ qax̂tax̂t? Have you eaten a sea cucumber?
aanasnaadax̂ bee
Aanasnaadax̂ Atx̂am kugan maazaĝulax. There are no bees on Atka. 
aang yes; hi; hello
ahngal say yes; assent 
ahngax̂tal agree
Aang, txin as chaayuutukuq. I want to drink tea with you.
aangsus berries

Tulkusix̂ aangsus ilagaan agulgazax̂. We use berries to make tulkusix̂.
aangsutil berry picking
Maamang as aangsutil angaliq. I went berry picking with my mother.
aaqanax̂ octopus
Aaqanax̂ qamchiing talĝis matazax̂. The octopus has eight tentacles.
aaqayax hips
Aaqayatukux̂. It has big hips.
aasal be with or by; do so; do
Siching guudas braataam kingii aasakux̂. He is four years younger than his brother.
aazmukax̂ primer
Niiĝuĝim aazmukaa idax̂talakat ii? Do you know the Atkan primer? 
B
baabuskax̂ midwife 
Baabuskax̂ ulaĝikux̂. The midwife is home.
baanax̂ steamhouse 
Baanax̂ hwaĝikux̂. The steamhouse is smoking.
baankix̂ can 
Baankix̂ alqutal haxsit? How did you open the can?
baliikax̂ smoked fish 
Baliikax̂ qalgaa qaatunazax̂. Eating smoked fish is delicious.

baraaskax̂ sheep 
Baraaskax̂ algam txin iĝanataĝulaa azax̂. A sheep is an animal that is not vicious. 
biilkix̂, viilkix̂ fork 
Biilkix̂ sux̂tal qakux̂. He is eating with a fork.
bluudichax̂ saucer 
Bluudichaan sux̂tal chaayuda. Drink your tea in the saucer.
braatax̂ brother 
Piitram braataa chalikux̂. Peter's brother is fishing.
bruudnas rubber boots 
Aalĝuudal bruudnat kangachx̂il ax̂taaĝutakux̂. You waded and got water in your boots.
bruukix̂ pants 
Bruukix̂ hagyakux̂. The pants are clean. 
buchuunikax̂ barrel 
Buchuunikax̂ taangax̂ chx̂aasakux̂. The barrel is full of water.
bulaavkix̂ safety pin 
Bulaavkix̂ ngus aĝada. Give me a safety pin.
bumaagix̂ paper 
Ataqan bumaagim liistaa alakuq. He wants one sheet of paper.

Ch
chaaduquudax̂ spider 
chaadaquudax̂ spider 
Chaaduquudax̂ niivudiin aguqalikux̂. The spider started making his net.
chaaduudax̂ blister 
Chang kugan chaaduudax̂ akux̂. There is a blister on my hand.
chaamiidal to shave 
Tayaĝux̂ inglaakut chaamiidal akux̂ txin isinax̂. A man was shaving and cut himself.
chaanikax̂ kettle 
Kukam ngaan wan chaanikax̂ aĝida. Give this kettle to Grandmother. 
chaanux̂ gray crowned rosy finch 
Chaanux̂ ulam kangan tagakux̂. The gray crowned rosy finch landed on top of the house.
chaang five 
chaangidim five times 
Alax ama qankus chaang ax̂. Two and three is five.
chaangiqlux̂ elbow 
Chaangiqlung nadusakuq. I hurt my elbow.
chaaqudal get into things; touch things without being told to (children) 
Aniqdus chaaqudakus. The children are touching things.
chaasxix̂ cup 
Chaasxix̂ taangax̂ itakux̂. The cup has water in it. 

Chaasxix̂ chaxtaĝulaa agach ngus aĝida. Give me a cup that has no crack. 
chaatix̂ forearm 
Chaating chuqudakux̂. My forearm is small.
chaayax musical instrument 
chaayax drum 
Chaayax akux̂ wa. This is a drum.
chaayux̂ tea 
chaayul to drink tea 
chaayuusis utensil used for drinking tea 
Chaayux̂ kayutukux̂. The tea is strong. 
Chaayux̂ atxax̂tikuq, haqal chaayuda. I made tea; come drink some tea.
chachx̂ux̂ belt 
Chachx̂ux̂ ngaan tayaqang akux̂ hikitiiĝutakux̂. I bought him a belt but he lost it again. 
chachx̂um kaamiĝii beaded belt 
Kiin chachx̂um kaamiĝii alal? Who wants a beaded belt?
chachix̂ cover 
chachil to close 
Yaasikax̂ atxax̂s chachil tumsada. Close the box right and put it away. 
chachix̂ cover; lid 
chachiĝil have cover or lid on; be closed 

chachix̂tal have or use as a cover 
chachix̂taasal: igiim chachix̂taasal be covered with 
chachiisal cover with 
chachilal close (several)
chadux̂ oil (diesel, seal, lubrication) 
chaduĝnax̂ blubber (seal, whale) 
Chadux̂ anaĝim suĝaaguzaa azax̂. Oil is a thing we use most often. 
Chadux̂ akitukux̂. The stove oil is expensive.
chadum taankaa oil drum 
Alax chadurn taankangis imdada. Fill two drums of oil.
chadux̂s, chaduĝil to crawl 
Hlalĝux̂ chidigiim kugan chaduĝil haqakux̂. A big boy is crawling over here on his knees.
chagax̂ red cedar (driftwood) 
Chagax̂ alaĝum achidan chalax̂takux̂. The red cedar is on the beach.
chagix̂ halibut 
Chagix̂ qam ichaaqidagan angunaa ax̂. The halibut is a thin, large fish.
chagitxax̂ white orchid (plantathera hyperborea) 
Chagitxax̂ qaatunazax̂. The white orchid is good to eat.
chaxs, chagikux̂ split; crack 
chaagidgul split (several) 
chaglilaĝil have cuts 
Iklax̂ chaagidgukux̂. He/she is splitting wood. 

chaglil tears or cuts into pieces 
chaglimax̂s tear to pieces 
chaxs, chaxtil split; cut open 
chaxtal have crack in it 
chaxtalal have several cracks 
Igluqas chaglil ilagaan chux̂taqax̂ agukux̂. He/she is cutting hide to make clothing.
chaxudax̂ wooden cap 
Chaxudax̂ ukux̂tax̂tax̂t? Have you ever seen a wooden cap?
chaĝus cut; wound 
chaĝutil cut; wound 
Atx̂uun chaĝus aamagnikux̂. He cut his finger and it is bleeding.
chax̂ hand 
Chax̂ sigus alazaĝulax. A hand has a lot of wrinkles. 
chax̂sax̂ soup; fish broth 
qam chax̂saa fish soup 
Qam chax̂saa qaatunazax̂. Fish soup is usually good to eat.
chax̂sxix̂ submerged reef 
Chax̂sxix̂ hitx̂azakux̂. A large surf emerges from the submerged reef.
chaknal be spoiled; rotten; have a rotten stench 
Ulux̂ txin chaknatikux̂. The meat gets spoiled.
chalaaqux̂ swordfish; sailfish 
Chalaaqux̂ chalakux̂. The sailfish landed on the beach.
chalax̂ clam 

chalasiisix̂ shovel for digging clams 
Chugum sinigan chalas akus. There are clams under the sand. 
chalal land; come ashore; drift ashore 
chalas, chalatil greet; meet (somebody who is landing) 
Alax̂ chalal hulal ax̂tanax̂. The whale apparently had come ashore last night.
chalil to fish (with pole) 
chaliisix̂ fish line 
Apriilax̂ hulakux̂ mal qaadas chalil saĝanaq. Because it was the first part of April, I fished for Dolly Varden.
chamĝul to wash 
Daniilax̂, atxax̂s chakin chamĝul taam angadada. Dan, wash your hands thoroughly and then wipe them.
chamlux̂ floor 
Chamlux̂ chx̂uuĝilgaax̂t. Let's wash the floor.
chams to scrape 
Igluqax̂ chamil huuĝuzuuzayakux̂. He's scraping the skin and trying to soften it.
chamusix̂ skin scraper 
Chamusix̂ sux̂tal igluqax̂ chamida. Use the scraper and scrape the hide.
chahmax̂ dish 
chahmaalix̂ wide valley 
Chahmax̂ six̂tikux̂. The dish broke.
chahmis block; obstruct 
chahmitil block; obstruct 

chahmidusix̂ plug (as in boat) 
Ayx̂aasim chahmidusii chuhmluda. Put the boat plug in place.
changal enter; go or creep in 
changamixs go up and down (something floating) 
Tumbuuyax̂ alaĝum ilan changamigikux̂. The buoy is going up and down in the water.
changanax̂ valley; ravine 
Itx̂aygis slum aslaan changanas tanax̂tadas. Reindeer live in the valleys in the summer.
changix̂ bow (of boat; kayak) 
changii bow (of boat; kayak) 
Ayx̂aasim changii qayakux̂. The boat's bow is high.
chaquxs to chew 
chaqugil chew 
Ulum tungaĝii chaqugikux̂. He's chewing on tough meat. 
Chaquxs qakuq. I am chewing my meat.
chasix̂ clock 
chasim angaa half an hour 
Chaang chasix̂ aygagikux̂. Five o'clock is coming. 
Chasix̂ stiinam daĝan inkakux̂. The clock is hanging on the wall. 
chataalux̂ slide 
Achixaaluĝim ulagan chidaĝan chataalux̂ ax̂. There is a slide by the schoolhouse.
chataasix̂ toboggan 
Chataasix̂ angazanazax̂. The toboggan comes in handy.

chidgix̂ something drifting 
chidgiilal drift away 
chidgilgal drift away 
chidgisxal drift away 
Ayx̂aasix̂ chidgisxakux̂. The boat is drifting. 
chidĝix̂ green or blue 
chidĝaayux̂ green 
Inkax̂ chidĝikux̂. The sky is blue. 
Qiigas chidĝaayukus. The grass is green. 
chidĝis become blue; bruise on the skin 
Chuyuu chidĝikux̂. His arm is blue.
chidigix̂ knee 
chidigaĝil to kneel 
Chidigim asuu. The knee has a cap. 
Chidigaan kugan akux̂t. You are on your knees.
chidil strain; filter (water) 
Buchuunikaan chidikux̂. He is straining his barrel.
chidul let itself down (sunset) 
Agadgix̂ chidukux̂. The sun is setting. 
chiduyax̂ lightning 

Chiduyax̂ qignam adigaa agux̂tazax̂. Lightning makes a bright flash in the sky. 
Saygim chiikdaa axchigakux̂. The bullet from a gun is fast. 
chiikdaĝus shotgun 
Chiikdaĝus sux̂tal sas kalukuq. I shot some ducks with a shotgun.
chiidax̂ young (of birds or animals) 
chiidax̂tal have as a pet 
Chiidax̂ matax̂t? Do you have a pet?
chiidĝux̂ infant 
Chiidĝux̂ saĝakux̂. The infant is sleeping. 
chiixuyaakax̂ song sparrow 
Chiixuyaakax̂ tunukux̂. The sparrow is singing.
chiikdax̂ bullet 
chas slide down 
chatil slide down 
chatal slide down a hill (person) 
Hlax̂ liiziĝil chatakux̂. A boy is skiing. 
Qayam ilidan chatakuq. I am sliding on the hillside. 
chatis strand flats (reef) 
Chatis qakakus. The strand flats are exposed from low tide.
chavichax̂ king salmon 

Chavichax̂ qam angunaa azax̂. The king salmon is a big fish.
chdaxtix̂ loose excrements; diarrhea 
Hlakuchax̂ chdaxtikux̂. The little boy has diarrhea.
chxal steal 
chxax̂ theft 
chxaqalix̂ thief 
ChxaqaIix̂ qichitix̂ chxakux̂. The thief stole the money.
chxux̂ sponge; soak through 
Chxux̂ sux̂tal chahmas chx̂uuĝada. Wash the dishes with the sponge.
chx̂al full; complete 
chx̂aasal be full of 
chx̂as fill 
chx̂adusal fill up full with 
Taankax̂ chx̂al ax̂takux̂. The tank is full.
chx̂uux̂s to wash 
chx̂uux̂sxal to mop 
Mariina chx̂uuĝil txin asx̂anix̂takux̂. Marina is washing clothes and she is tired. 
Chamlux̂ chx̂uux̂sxal aguun machaalkix̂ suĝazax̂. When we wash the floor we use a mop. 
chidaxs stretch 
chidagikux̂ gets long 
Imyaĝii chidagikux̂. His fishline apparently stretched.

chidaĝa border; margin; space beside something 
Ulam chidaĝan akux̂. It is by the house.
chidgil hang loose; slack 
Chux̂taqas chidgil ax̂takus. The clothing is hanging loose on the line.
chiikil be in disorder (messy house) 
Ulax̂ chiikikux̂. The house is messy.
chiiknax̂ limpet 
Quganas kugan chiiknas chitakus. The limpets are sticking to the rocks.
chiimdal roll with the surf 
Duurang sux̂tal chiimdal angaliq. I was rolling with the surf in my boat today.
chiinkax̂ sheet metal 
Chiinkax̂ tungaĝikux̂. The sheet metal is sturdy.
chiipax̂ chain 
Chiipas asxum daĝan inkakux̂. The chains are hanging on the nail.
chiirtix̂ to circle or underline 
Anaĝix̂ alanaan ukux̂tal agumis chiirtida. If there is something you want, underline it.
chigdax̂ raincoat (parka made of intestines) 
Unangam chix̂taliisii chigdax̂ hiilax̂tadax̂. A Native raincoat is called a chigdax̂. 
Chigdax̂ an'gis ilagaan aguĝizax̂. The raincoat is made out of intestines.
chiglil take apart; take off (clothes) 
Txin chiglil taaman quyuda. Undress before you go to bed.
chixis stick; attach; cover 
chixitil stick; attach; cover 
Butiilkam krisxii chixis taaman tumsada. Cover the bottle before you put it away.
chixtal be united; be married 

Tayaĝux̂ ama ayagax̂ chixtakux. The couples are married.
chiĝanax̂ river 
chiĝanakuchax̂ stream 
Chix̂tax̂ iĝanal aguun chiĝanax̂ axchigazax̂. When it rains a lot the river flows fast. 
Chiĝanakuchax̂ qamdalakax̂. The stream is not deep. 
chiĝdux̂ high tide 
chiĝdul high tide 
Agux̂ chiĝdutikux̂. The tide is rising.
chiĝnil make wet 
chix̂s become wet 
chix̂tikux̂ become wet 
chix̂tal be wet (ground, people) 
chix̂tax̂ rain 
chix̂taliisix̂ raincoat 
Alqul imliin chiĝnil angalix̂t? Why did you get your hair wet? 
Chix̂tax̂ malgakux̂. It is raining. 
Chix̂tatikux̂. It started raining.
chikas larvae (fly, bug) 
Chikas hudas iĝamanaĝulax hitikux̂. The larvae spoiled the dried fish.
chikux̂ piece of meat in a pot 
Asum chikungis iguda. Take the pieces of meat out.
chilal become loose 

Iihmiising chilal ax̂takux̂. My shoelace became loose. 
chilal untie 
Ayx̂aasim paalinaa chilil aqichada. Untie the boat's bowline.
chilux̂ Alaskan Longspur (migratory bird) 
Chilux̂ igax̂takux̂. The long-spur is flying.
chimchis something caught between the teeth 
chimchilil pick the teeth 
Agaluun chimchilida. Pick your teeth with a toothpick. 
chimchiliisix̂ toothpick 
Qaataa chimchiliisis? Where are the toothpicks?
chimgux̂ parcel 
Sunam kugan chimgux̂ ayuxchx̂iitukuq. I want to send my package out on the tugboat. 
Hlang ngaan chimgux̂ matakuq. I have a parcel for my son.
chimx̂al splash 
chix̂aasal splash with 
Taangax̂ sul txin chimx̂al ii haman? Did he splash water on you? 
Taangax̂ ngiin chimx̂aasakux̂t. You spilled water on us.
chimix̂ footprint 
Qaniigim kugan chihmis ukux̂takuq. I see footprints in the snow. 
Itx̂aygim chimii al ax̂takux̂. It is a reindeer's footprint.
chihmiglul to wring 
Chx̂uuĝis pulusxal chihmiglul qichx̂ida. Wring out the clothes and hang them out to dry.

chihmignux̂ big toe 
chihmignum qagalĝingis toenails 
Chihmignus kitam kugan azas. We have toes on our feet. 
Chihmignung nanakux̂. My toe hurts.
  
chingax̂ impassable point 
Chingax̂ anax̂ mal axsxaakalakax̂. The impassable point cannot be crossed.
chiplaatix̂ chicken; chick 
Chiplaatix̂ qakux̂. The chicken is eating. 
chiqix̂ earth; ground; mud 
chiqitul to be muddy 
Akalugix̂ chiqitukux̂. The path is muddy.
chiripiichis shingles 
Ulam chiripiichingis awaasakux̂. He is working on the house shingles.
chisal be scattered 
Hax̂satis chisal ax̂takus. All the gun shells are scattered. 
chisil scatter (objects) 
Asxinux̂ sas ngaan muusix̂ tanam kugan chisikux̂. The girl is throwing oats out on the ground for the birds. 
Mukax̂ stuuluĝim hangadan chisikux̂. She scattered some flour on the table. 

chis grab (as an eagle grabs) 
chitil put on 
Ulam kangaa chitikux̂. The top of the house is finished.
chital intact 
Ulam huzuu chital ax̂takux̂. The house is all intact.
chitx̂ix̂ gall bladder 
Isuĝim chitx̂ii tatikux̂. The gall bladder of the seal has burst.
chitx̂udgix̂ boil (on skin) 
Chuyung kugan chitx̂udgix̂ akux̂. There is a boil on my skin.
Chitviirkax̂ Thursday 
Chitviirkax̂ taĝulakux̂. It is the eve of Thursday.
chiyal to reach 
Fiidur Praanikas suuĝan chiyal akux̂ ukul angaling. I found Ted reaching for the cookies.
chlax̂s dive 
chlaĝikux̂ dives 
Alax̂ chlaĝikux̂. The whale dived.
chmaa its tail 
alam chmaa the whale's tail 
Alam chmaa angunazax̂. The whale's tail is very large.
chngax̂ fur; hair 
chngatul hairy; furry 

chngulil shed fur 
Isuĝis ama qawas chngulikus. The seals and sea lions are shedding their fur.
chngatux̂ sea otter 
Chngatux̂ quganam kangan akux̂. The sea otter is on top of the rock.
chuchaxs stand erect; be steep 
chuchagikux̂ stands erect: steep 
Kiiĝuusix̂ chuchagikux̂. The mountain is steep.
chuchudal ring sharply 
Kulukuulax̂ chuchudal tunukux̂. The bell is ringing sharply. 
chuga the northside 
chugaanul go toward the north 
chugaanux̂tal go north 
chuguuĝix̂ northern 
Tayaĝus chugaanux̂tal qaqamiiĝukus. The men are hunting on the northside.
chugaayux̂ shawl 
Chugaayuun chuda. Put your shawl on.
chugal sufficient; complete 
Masinam anaĝingis chugal ax̂takus. The motor's parts are all complete.
chugilakan be silent 
Chugilakan saĝada. Quiet down and go to sleep.
chuguĝul to point 
Asxinux̂ alqux̂ chuguĝul hingamax̂? What is the girl pointing at?

chugux̂ sand 
chuguĝil be sandy 
chugutul be full of sand 
Chugux̂ quganam six̂taa ax̂. Sand is broken up rock. 
Alaĝum achidan chugux̂ akux̂. There is sand by the beach.
chuxcham uliigii Eskimo boot 
Chuxcham uliigingis wan akiitas chuĝalizas. Eskimo shoes are still worn today. 
chux̂tal wear 
Qatxuuyang chux̂tal ax̂takux̂t. You are wearing my shirt.
chux̂taqas clothes 
Kiin chux̂taqas imis ax̂s? Who gave you the clothes? 
Chux̂taqas tugiidam kugan inkakus. The clothes are hanging on the clothesline. 
chukiidgix̂ gnat 
Chukiidgis alanalakaĝis. There are lots of gnats.
chulaanux̂ chest 
Hyaagam ilagaan chulaanux̂ agulgaakax̂. We can make a chest from wood.
chulal to dress 
chul put on (coat) 

chuchx̂il put on (clothes) 
chux̂tachx̂il let or make wear 
Chuuyung chul angaliq. I put on my jacket. 
Adaam txin chulal aqadaguun txin chamĝuda. Adam, you dress, then wash your face.
chulixtax̂ sandpiper 
Chulixtas txidix ukux̂takus. The sandpipers are looking at each other.
chumlil to sharpen 
chumliisix whet stone 
Alqus ngiin ukinax̂ chumlil hingamax̂t? Why are you sharpening the knife?
chumnax pine wood 
Chumnax hyaagachxizax̂ ax̂. Pine wood is a good wood.
chumnux yellow 
chumnugix̂ yellow 
Qiigam asx̂ax̂taa chumnugikux̂. The dead grass is yellow.
chumtux̂ bone marrow 
Itx̂aygim chumtuu qaatunazax̂. The bone marrow of the reindeer is good eating.
chuhmlul put in place 
Kavkaanas chuhmlul saĝanaq. I set the traps yesterday. 
Taankam tagadaa chuhmlul angaliq. I put on a new tank today.
chunix̂ backbone 
chuniĝix̂ backbone 
Isuĝim chuniĝii sigusada. Bring the seal backbone.
chunukax̂ nape of the neck 
Chunukang huĝnaazakux̂. My neck is warm.
chuhnil stab 
chunaaqul catch fish with fish spear 

chuhnital stick into 
chuhnusal stab; pierce 
chuhnusix̂ awl 
Isux̂ chuhnil asx̂atinaq. I stabbed a seal (with a harpoon) and killed it.
chungus down (bird's) 
Saĝam misuukaa kasamim chungungis iIagaan aguĝikux̂. The sleeping bag is filled with eider down. 
chuqax̂ throat 
chuqaI shout holler 
chuqadal choke 
Hlax̂ chuqakux̂. The boy is hollering.
chuqix̂ root (bottom part) 
Asxutim chuqii sixsakux̂. The post broke from the bottom.
chuqudal little 
Algam chiidaa chuqudazax̂. An animal's newborn offspring is usually small.
chutal be plugged up; stopped; clogged 
Singkix̂ chutakux̂. The sink is clogged.
chutxii its point 
chutxidigal be pointed; sharp 
chutxital have points 
Sdax̂ chaang chutxix̂tazax̂. A star has five points.
chuulkis stockings 
Chuulkit chuda. Put on your socks. 

chuuyux̂ jacket or sweater 
Chuuyux̂ asxinung ngaan triivanaq. I ordered a jacket for my daughter. 
Chuuyux̂ matax̂t. Do you have a sweater?
chuyux̂ arm 
chaagamguuĝix̂ chuyux̂ right arm 
Chax̂ chuyum angtaa ax̂. The hand is at the end of the arm. 
chyaalis, chaalis immature seagull 
Chaalix̂ slukam chiidaa ax̂. Chaalix̂ is a seagull's young offspring.
D
daax̂tux̂ kidney 
Daax̂tung qanang ax̂? Where is my kidney?
daĝan attach to, in, on or with 
Qidux̂ daĝan qisax̂takuu. The rope is tied around it. 
daĝuutal have attached to it 
Dux̂taan umĝix̂ daĝuutal ii? Does your hook have bait on it?
dax̂ eye 

das eyes 
dam chiikdaa pupil of eye 
dam qax̂saa eyelash 
Qanaang das maĝix̂t? How many eyes do you have? 
Daa qaxchikdakux̂. His eye is dark.
dalaax̂s snare 
Kasamis dalaax̂s lalgazaqas. We used to snare eider ducks.
dalal to string 
Kaamis dalal agumis halumaangan aqaning. If you string the beads, I will help you sew. 
damluu: haluusim damluu eye of a needle 
Haluusim damluu chuqudakux̂. The eye of the needle is small.
daqas wits; senses 
daqaĝil be smart; intellegent 
daqatulakan be stupid 
daquulaxs be mad (crazy) 
daquulagikux̂ be mad (crazy) 
daquulaxtal be crazy 
Daqat haqatal agach anĝaĝizax̂. He uses common sense.
dix̂ soot 
diituudal to be sort of dark 

Plitax̂ ditukux̂. The stove is sooty from burning stove oil.
diikax̂ mischievious; wild 
diikal to be wild 
Aniqdux̂ diikal tunux̂takux̂. The child is talking mischieviously.
Dikaabrax̂ (agalĝalux̂) December 
Dikaabrax̂ agaluuĝix̂ tugidax̂ ax̂? Is December the last month?
dimil smoke 
dimiilux̂ smoke house 
Haanus dimikuq. I am smoking red salmon.
divaanix̂ couch; divan 
Divaanix̂ uluudakux̂. The couch is red. 
druuvis beads (from shotgun) 
Chiikdaĝus druuvidigakus. The shotgun has a good bead pattern.
druuzix̂ yeast 
Xliibax̂ agulgal aguun druuzix̂ suĝazax̂. When making bread, yeast is used.
dux̂tax̂ hook 
Dux̂tam qankus talĝix̂taa agach alakuq. I want a hook that has three points. 
Imyaĝiin dux̂tax̂ daĝuutal ii? Does your fishing pole have a hook on it?
duurax̂ dory 
Duurax̂ ulĝikux̂. The dory is approaching.
duvuvax̂ mahogany wood 

Duvuvax̂ hyaagam tungaĝii ax̂. Mahogany is a very sturdy wood.
F
fitilix̂ wick 
Lampaadam fitilii adukux̂. The icon lamp wick is long.
Fivraalix̂ (anulgilax̂) February 
Fivraalix̂ tugidam haaganaa ax̂. February is a lean month.
funaarix̂ lantern (Coleman) 
Funaarix̂ uĝakux̂. The lantern went out.
furaaskix̂ stocking hat 
Furaaskix̂ aniqdum ngaan ukuda. Find a hat for the baby. 
fuutax̂ ruler 
Fuutax̂ anaĝim angazanaa ax̂. A ruler is a very handy thing to use.
G
gaavanax̂ harbor 
Atx̂ax̂ gaavanachxizax̂ matazax̂. Atka has a good harbor.
gazaliinax̂ gasoline 
Taankam nagan gazaliinax̂ akux̂. The tank has gasoline in it.
gil feel attraction to; covet 
gix̂tal want; desire 
Silan txin gikuu. He feels attracted to her.

giniraalax̂ General 
Giniraalax̂ ukux̂tax̂tax̂t. Have you ever seen a General?
Ginvaarix̂ January 
Ginvaarix̂ itaangix̂ tugidax̂ azax̂. January is the first month.
glaastukax̂ necktie 
Kamgaamis aĝigumis glaastukax̂ ii chux̂tazax̂t? Do you wear a tie when going to church? 
gul pass through; go through 
guĝil be hollow 
gus, gutil put through; pierce through 
Chngatux̂ satxax̂ gul ax̂takux̂. A sea otter went through a gill net.
gulaasxix̂ boot leg; leg of mukluk 
Aalĝuudal agumis gulaasxit hangatada. When you wade in the water, keep your boot legs up.
gulal take a walk; stroll 
Gulal hangaĝaax̂t. Let's take a stroll. 
gunil drive away 
Sabaakax̂ itx̂aygis gunikux̂. The dog drove the reindeer away.
gursuukix̂ honey bucket 
Gursuukix̂ hyutida. Spill the honey bucket.

guudax̂ year 
Qanaang guudax̂tax̂t? How old are you?
guurnichax̂ livingroom 
Guurnichax̂ hagyaachxuzakux̂. The livingroom is very clean.
guustal be thick (as of liquid) 
Suupax̂ guustakux̂. The soup is thick.
X
xaadagnaax̂s run 
Kuusxix̂ xaadagnaax̂s utikux̂. The cat is running down 
xaadagnaaĝil to run 
Asxinux̂ haqayal xaadagnaaĝikux̂. The girl is running carefully. 
xadaxs move fast; run; walk fast 
Xadaxs aygagikux̂. He is walking fast.
xliibax̂ bread 
Xliibax̂ unal angaliq. I baked bread today. 
xliibam ukinaa bread knife 
Xliibam ukinaa matalakax̂. He doesn't have a bread knife.
Xliibam huzuu alakuq. I need a whole loaf of bread.

x̂
x̂ax̂: chagim x̂aa belly portion of halibut 
Chagim x̂aa qaatunazax̂. The belly portion of a halibut is good eating.
x̂aykux̂ dog salmon 
|aykux̂ satxakux̂. He/she netted a dog salmon. 
H
haadal to get better (from illness); calm down; abate (wind) 
Asx̂aaĝil angalikux̂ haadal ax̂takux̂. He's been sick all day but he's getting better.
haagal to be hungry; starve 
haagax̂ hunger; starvation 
haagax̂ asx̂aasal starve to death 
haaganil: txin haaganil become hungry 
haaganal: tanam haaganaa island without food 
Angalim huzuu haagal angaliq. I've been hungry all day.
haaĝanil stop (a person) 
txin haaĝanil stop; cease; remain 
haaĝatal: txin haaĝatal stop (for awhile) 
Masinas txidix haaĝanikus. The motor has stopped running. 
Txin haaĝatal anĝiqadagumis taaman txin aygax̂tida. Stop and rest for awhile before you start walking again. 

haakulalakan be clever; know how 
Hlax̂ haakulalakax̂. The boy is very clever.
haanux̂ red salmon 
Haanux̂ siknutikux̂. The red salmon is getting old.
haasxux̂ spear thrower; throwing stick (kept on the right side of the kayak) 
Haasxux̂ ukux̂tax̂tax̂t? Have you ever seen a spear thrower?
haasix double-bladed paddle 
Iqyam haasii akux̂. This is a baidarky's paddle. 
hachiĝil wait; wait for 
Hingahligan txin hachiĝil angaliq. I've been waiting for you right here.
hachix̂ back (human or animal) 
hachik kukin haĝul carry on my back 
Haching nanakux̂. My back is aching.
hachil stuck 
hachis, hachitil close up; shut (a door) 
Imyaĝim kayuxtaa quganam quchigan hachikux̂. His fishing line's sinker got stuck between rocks.
hadaa direction of; towards 
hadakix direction of 
hadangis plural form 
hadaakul turn; turn toward; head for 

hadaakutal turn; look toward 
Kamgam ulaa qagaa hadan hadaakutakux̂. The church faces toward the east. 
hadaatxan toward; into
hadgix̂ channel 
Sunax̂ hadgix̂ axs qakuuĝakux̂. The ship went through the channel into the bay.
haĝlaxs, haĝlagil to have bad dreams; nightmares 
Kukang amgaax haĝlaxs amaxsix̂. My grandmother had a nightmare last night.
hagyal to be clean 
hagyaachxuzal to be very clean 
hagyas, hagyatil make clean 
hagyatal have cleaned 
hagyayal clean (fish); clean up (place) 
Ulang hagyayakuq. I am cleaning my house. 
haxs grow; grow up (referring to people) 
hagil to grow up 
Hlax̂ hagdukux̂. The boy is maturing quickly.
haxsal open; become open; become visible 
haxsil turn on; open 
haxsix̂tal open (temporarily) 
Qahmigix̂ haxsida. Open the door. 

Taangam kraanaa haxsil aĝiilal ax̂takux̂. The faucet was left running.
haxsiisix̂ can opener 
Haxsiisix̂ sux̂tal baankix̂ haxsilgazax̂. We use a can opener to open a can.
haĝaaĝux̂ narrow indentation at the coast (ten to sixty feet deep) with rocks surrounding 
Haĝaaĝum qakuutxaa akux̂. It is a very deep inlet.
haĝadil be pale 
Sagimaĝii haĝadikux̂. Her face is pale.
haĝis put upright 
haĝitil lift 
Saĝal qilakuq ting haĝitikux̂t. I was sleeping this morning when you woke me up.
haĝiyal make get up; save; make stand 
Asxutix̂ haĝiyakux̂. He is trying to stand the post up.
haĝuĝiilux̂ pack sack 
Muuyusii haĝuĝiilux̂ matal Atx̂ax̂ hnux̂tanax̂. Moses had a pack when he came to Atka. 
haĝul pack; take on his back 
Paavilaa haĝul chiĝanax̂ ngaan aqaanuusada. Pauline, come and take her across the river. 
Braatang Isux̂ haĝul ixchiisanax̂. My brother packed a seal home.
haĝuyal to wrestle 
Alax hlax txidix haĝuyal amĝinadix aadakus. Two boys are trying to beat each other by make believe fighting.
hax̂sal to pack; prepare; get ready 
Sunam kugan ayugiiĝan hax̂sal hingamakux̂. She's packing for a trip on the tug. 

kax̂satix̂ gun shell 
Hax̂satix̂ kaluusal aaĝakung kalulagaa-ax̂takux̂. The shell I tried to use did not shoot.
hax̂s stand up; get up 
hax̂til stand up; get up 
hax̂tal be in a raised position; stay up; out of bed 
hax̂tux̂sal get up (many) 
Tayaĝux̂ hax̂tal hulakux̂. The man stayed awake all night.
haka up there (as in the air, on top of a hill) 
hakan the one up there 
hakang up there 
hakaax from up there 
hakaaĝal get up there; rise 
hakaanul move upwards 
hakaatxakux̂ it is way up there 
hakangudaĝan upwards; (split) lengthwise 
Hakahligan inkatiqang. I have hung it up there. 
Igax̂tax̂ hakang igax̂takux̂. An airplane is flying up there. 
hakax̂ feather 

Hakax̂ chugum kugan akux̂ sulakan angaling. A feather was on the sand but I didn't pick it up.
haku up there (aslant) 
hakun the one up there 
hakuux from up there 
hakuuĝal come up, ashore or toward the shore 
hakuuĝaasal come up on; take ashore 
hakuuĝas take or get up 
hakuuĝatil take or get up 
hakuutxakux̂ it is far up 
hakungudaĝan upwards 
Agux̂ hakuutxakux̂. The tide is far up. (flood tide)
halaaĝul to peel 
Kartuufilas halaaĝul unada. Peel the potatoes and cook them. 
halal turn head; turn around 
halaasal turn or lift 
halazal turn the head several times 
halax̂tal turn the head 
halalil seasick 
Isux̂ halal akux̂ kaluqang. When the seal turned its head I shot him.
halas take the cover off 
Ingtiin halas aqadagumis taaman hax̂tida. Take your blanket off first before you get up.
halgix̂ root 
Anqax̂tal halgix̂ ting as ilgada. Let's go out to look for root. 

halim hadaa the windward 
halmudax̂s go straight against the wind 
Ayx̂aasix̂ halmudax̂s ayx̂akux̂. The boat is going against the wind.
halul to sew a skin 
halux̂ seam 
Anastaasiyax̂ igluqax̂ chaglil halul angalix̂. Anastasiyaa cut and sewed a skin. 
haluĝikux̂ it is sewn 
haluusal sew with 
haluusix̂ needle
hama over there (invisible) 
hamaaĝal go there; arrive there 
hamaaĝaasal take over there 
hamaaĝas: txin hamaaĝas get there 
hamaanul go over there; out there 
hamaanuchx̂il send there 
hamaanuusal take with him (as expected or mentioned) 
hamalix̂tal go over there 
Hamalix̂tal uyada. Go over there and get it. 
hamamal do so 
hamamaasal do so 
hamamaalal to be done so 
hamamas do so there or then 

hamangudax̂s go there 
hamangudaĝan over there in that direction
hamĝax̂ sleeve 
Hamĝax̂ chagliikalakaq. I cannot cut a sleeve. 
hams heal; be healed 
hamil heal; be healed 
hamiyal heal; cure 
hamayal heal; cure 
hamayaasix̂ means for curing (plaster) 
Chang hams ax̂takux̂. My hand has healed.
hanax̂ malgakux̂ the sea is breaking against the beach 
hanĝis breakers 
Hanĝix̂ hadangin haqakux̂. The surf is coming toward us.
hanix̂ lake 
Hanix̂ angunakux̂. The lake is big. 
hanim kamgituu American Goldeneye (waterfowl) 
Hanim kamgituu sax̂ ax̂. The Goldeneye is a duck.
hanikal float 
hanikax̂ fish float 
hanikas float; lay still 

hanikatil float; lay still 
hanikatal anchor (boat) 
hanikatil anchor (boat) 
Ayx̂aasix̂ udam ilan hanikakux̂. The boat is floating out in the bay.
hangadaa higis to jump over 
Fiidur hyaagam hangadaa higis akum txin manitanax̂. Fiidur was proud when he jumped over some lumber.
hangal to climb 
hangakux̂ to climb 
Hlam tutaqaĝiiyulax usxix̂ hangakux̂. A naughty boy climbed on top of a tree.
haqal come; set in; come about 
haqaasal come with; bring; hand over; give; catch up with 
Sunax̂ anaĝis haqaasakux̂. The ship is bringing things to the village. 
haqaasachx̂il has brought himself up to the same level 
haqachx̂il let come 
haqax̂tal come 
haqalal come one after another 
haqanisal decoy; imitate to make come 
haqaqalil start to come 
haqas, haqatil come upon; find; bring about 
haqatal know; have learned to know 
haqatalakan don't know 
haqataasal know 
haqataqadal do not remember 
haqayal be careful; cautious 
haqayaasal be careful with

haqisngal sneeze 
Aniqdux̂ haqisngakux̂. The baby is sneezing. 
hasax̂ flat rock that goes out in the sea; skerry 
Qawas hasam kugan hangax̂takus. The sea lions are on the skerry.
hasxil head into the wind 
Hasxil ayx̂akux̂. He is heading into the wind (in a boat).
hasinal be many; much 
Anĝaĝinas hasinakus. There are lots of people.
hatax̂s slip; startled 
hataĝikux̂ slip; startled 
hataĝnil startle; scare 
hataĝniisal: igiim hataĝniisal be afraid of 
Hlakuchax̂ hataĝikux̂. The little boy got startled.
hatax̂chx̂il to bounce 
Mariiyax̂ hmiichix̂ hatax̂chx̂il mikaasakux. Mary is bouncing the ball. 
hatix̂ ten 
Ataqan ama sichiing hatix̂ ax̂. One and nine is ten.

hatidim ten times 
Hatidim hatix̂ qanaang ax̂? What is ten times ten?
hatix̂ lip 
Hatix̂ kixsxaa nanazax̂. It hurts when you bite your lip. 
hawa there 
hawan that one 
haang, hawang there 
hagumal do there or so 
hawaaĝal arrive there 
hagumaasal do so to 
hawangudaĝan over there; that way 
Tayaĝux̂ hawangudaĝan huyakux̂. The man went over that way.
hawaxs to tow 
Iklax̂ tanam hadagaan hawagil udusakux̂. He is towing the log down the hill.
hayal to request; ask a favor 
Ting hayakux̂. He/she asks me for a favor.
hazan next to it 
Hazan atx̂ung adukux̂. The finger next to my middle finger is long.
hiiyukax̂ beak; bill (of bird) 
Hilgim hiiyukaa adukux̂. The oyster catcher's bill is long.
hidangil turn up (the lamp); make the flame higher 
Laampax̂ hidangida. Turn up the lamp. 

hidatix̂ spring; well; swamp 
Hidatix̂ umdukux̂. The swamp is soggy.
higal frozen 
higas: txin higas be freezing 
higasxal freeze; be cold (person) 
higayal freezing weather 
higayas start to freeze 
Higayax̂ malgakux̂. It is freezing out today.
higitil to jump 
Vasilii higitil akux̂ ayunax̂. Willie jumped and fell.
higidgil be messed up; have flying hair 
Imling higidgikux̂. My hair is sticking up.
hixs burn; put fire to 
higikux̂ burn 
hixsxal be burnt 
hixtuqas kindling 
hixtuqax̂sil make; chop kindling 
Hlax̂ hixtuqas agukux̂. The boy is making kindling. 

hix̂sal understand; find out; remember 
hix̂saasal find out; grasp; notice; recognize 
hix̂sachx̂il make understand 
hix̂sanil let find out 
hix̂sanaaĝasal try to find out 
Ayagax̂ anaa hix̂saasakux̂. She recognized the lady.
hiidux̂ draught; drafty 
Ulax̂ hiidukux̂. The house is drafty.
hiigix̂ black oyster catcher 
Hiigix̂ chugum kugan akux̂. The oyster catcher is on the sand.
hika up there 
hikan that one up there 
hikang up there 
hikangudaĝan upward there 
Qagmangis hikang igax̂takux̂. The geese are flying up there.
hikil disappear from sight 
hikidgul cast; fling 
hikis lose; miss; waste 
hikitikux̂ lose; miss; waste 
Hlax̂ hikikux̂. The boy disappeared from sight.
hiku up there, slantwise 
hikun that one up there 

hikung up there 
hikuux from up there 
hikungudaĝan upward, a slant, there 
Tiĝlax̂ hikung akux̂. The eagle is up there.
hikuuĝas: txin hikuuĝas be filled; satisfied; pull to its place (boat) 
Tayaĝus ayx̂aasix̂ sayul hikuuĝatikus. The men pulled the boat up to its place.
hil say; utter; call; summon; ask for; tell 
hikux̂ says; utters 
hiĝal be said; be told; be ordered 
hiĝadax̂ it is told 
hiĝazadax̂ it is told 
hix̂tal say; tell; explain; promise; ask for; call for 
hiilaĝal be called; be done continually 
hiilax̂tal be called; it is told
hiilal be done; be done to 
hiisal: aalax hiisal do a second time. 
hiisax̂tal say; tell; order; call 
Alqus hix̂tal hingamax̂t? What are you saying?
hilaax̂ confession 
hilal to read 
Ivaan tachim hilal aluĝilakax̂. John can't read and write yet. 
Taatax̂ hilaqulix̂ alanaan hix̂takux̂. Father said he needs something to read. 

hilgil dig 
Vikiintix̂ ulang chidaĝaa hilgil hiĝakux̂. Someone said Vincent is digging by my house. 
himlax̂ white crested waves; rough sea 
hilmax̂ white crested waves 
Himlas txidix qayatikus. The swells are getting rough.
hinga right there; that 
hingan that one 
hiikus those 
hiing there 
hingaax from there 
hiikul be so; for that reason 
hiikuulal be done to so; receive such treatment 
Hingan ayagax̂ ukux̂tada. Look at that woman.
hingalas nits; louse eggs 
Hingalas kamgii kugan akux̂. He has nits in his hair.
hingul to push 
Kachalam kugan akuq ting hingul ting hataĝninax̂. I was on the swing, then he pushed me and scared me. 
hiqamaxsil stutter; stammer 
Asxinux̂ hiqamaxsil tunux̂takux̂. The girl is stuttering.

his go out; come out; grow; make; put into state 
hitil go out; come out 
Ulam ilagaan hitil angaliq. I went out from the house today. 
hidgul make (several) 
Kamgadas txidix hidgukus. They became Christians. 
hidulal be taken out 
hidusal go out with; take out 
Taangax̂ hidulakux̂. The water is being taken out. 
Ulux̂ hidusakux̂. He takes out the meat.
hitaxs come forth; appear; show up 
Quganax̂ sakang hitagikux̂. The rock appeared out there.
hitagnax̂ straight cloud with a sharp edge on top 
Hitagnam sitxan slaĝuzax̂. Underneath the straight cloud it is stormy.
hital go out for awhile; make, put into temporarily; regard as; recognize as 
Hital slaaĝax̂taangan ax̂siting. I am going out for awhile.
hitxalil start to go or come out 
Uuguchiingix̂ chixtiim ilagaan hitxalikux̂. The fox is starting to come out of its den.
hitxidgul cast out 
hitxis cast out; kick out of the house 
hitxitil cast out 
Sabaakax̂ ulam ilaan hitxisxakux̂. The dog was kicked out of the house. 
hitxiyal try to cast out

hitxix̂ tail 
sabaakam hitxii dog's tail 
Sam hitxii adukux̂. The duck's tail is long.
hitx̂ax̂ breakers (out in the ocean) 
Chax̂sxix̂ hitx̂azakux̂. There are breakers by the reef.
hitmil to pluck (duck) 
Sax̂ hitmikuq. I am plucking a duck.
hitnisas plants 
Hitnisas kuuĝakus. The plants are now growing. 
hitzaaĝux̂ newly emerged 
hitzal go out each time; one after the other; make several into 
Taaĝan' gim hitzaaĝuu qaatunazax̂. A newly emerged cow parsnip is good to eat.
hiyal try to make; have become 
Kamgadax̂ txin hiyakux̂. He/she is trying to become a Christian.
hizax barely; with difficulty; almost 
Isux̂ hizax kalukux̂. He almost shot a seal.
hizal repeat 
huĝdux̂ moss 
Huĝdux̂ qayas kugan agach hitiiguzazax̂. Moss grows mostly on hills.
huchutal: txin huchutal behave well; behave nicely 
huchutaasal comfort; soothe 
Aniqdux̂ txin huchutakux̂. The child is behaving nicely 

huchuuzal behave; be quiet 
huchuuzalakan not behaving 
Aniqdux̂ huchuuzalakan. The baby is not behaving.
hudax̂ dry fish 
hudax̂sil to make dried fish 
Hudax̂ qakalakax̂ mal chikalgakux̂. The dry fish is not dry and that's why the maggot are on it.
hugix̂ case; bag 
huxsx̂il put shoes or boots on 
Kitat huxsx̂ida. Put your shoes on.
hugin'gix̂ confined air 
hugin'giĝiqadakux̂ it is running out of air 
Laampax̂ hugin' giĝiqadakux̂. The lamp ran out of air.
huĝdaxs boils 
huĝdagikux̂ to boil 
Asux̂ plitam kugan huĝdagil ngus hiĝakux̂. I was told the pot on the stove is boiling.
huĝnaa, ulam huĝnaa the lee side of the house 
huĝnaadal be lukewarm 
huĝnaazal be warm 
huĝnax̂tal have shelter from the wind 
Ulax̂ huĝnaazakux̂. The house is warm. 
huĝnas: txin huĝnas get warm 
huĝnatal keep warm (brood) 

huĝnayal warm
hulal bloom (flowers); dawn, beginning (of day, month); do in or until the morning or tomorrow 
hulaalal dawn with (weather) 
Slachxizax̂ hulaalal ax̂takux̂. It has dawned with good weather. 
hulazaaĝux̂ the first light in the morning; bloom 
Aahmaaĝix̂ hulazaaĝukux̂. The flower just bloomed. 
hulmal melt (snow, ice, salt) 
hulmil melt; cause to melt 
Kdax̂ hulmakux̂. The ice is melting. 
Saalax̂ hulmil alaadikas unalgaax̂t. Let's melt lard and fry some dough. 
Kdax̂ hulmikux̂. He is melting the ice.
humgix lungs 
Humging nanakux̂. My lungs hurt.
hums inflate 
humikux̂ to inflate
humĝal to be swollen (door) 
humĝatil swell; to become swollen 
humsxal to be inflated 
humtal to be in a swollen state; bulge 
humsil blow; inflate 
humsiisal blow (into something) 
Baluunax̂ humikuq. I am inflating the balloon. 

Baluunax̂ humsil txin asx̂anix̂ takux̂. He's trying very hard to blow up his balloon.
hunax̂ hole 
Kriisax̂ hunax̂ agukux̂. The rat made a hole.
hunkil tip (something over) 
hus, hutil tip over 
Dramix̂ hunkikux̂. He tipped the drum over. 
Ayx̂aasix̂ hutikux̂. The boat tipped over.
husal roll 
husatil to roll 
Quganax̂ husal utikux̂. The rock rolls down the hill. 
Chadum taangkaa husatil udusakux̂. He is rolling a drum down the hill.
husix̂ jaw; lower jaw 
Husix̂ matax̂t? Do you have a lower jaw?
husix̂ load 
husix̂tal have as a load 
husiilal be loaded in 
husitul have a big load 
Ayx̂aasix̂ husitukux̂. The boat has a large load.
hutax̂ thumb 
Hutax̂ cham atx̂uu ax̂. A thumb is a kind of finger. 

hutux̂ handle 
Qahmigim hutuu qinganakux̂. The door handle is cold.
hutyuugas iron; flat iron 
Hutyuugas txidix akinatikus. The flat irons are getting hot.
huudal shout; howl; whistle 
Sunax̂ huudakux̂. The ship is blowing its whistle.
huutuqaax̂s rock; roll 
Sunax̂ huutuqaax̂s ayx̂akux̂. The boat is rolling back and forth while running.
huyal go in some direction 
huyaasal go with; bring 
Ulam hadan huyakux̂. He/she is going to the house.
huyĝix̂ steam; smoke (from kettle or from the sea in a storm) 
Alaĝux̂ huyuĝikux̂. The sea is steaming.
huyux̂ brother 
huyuu her brother 
Huyux̂ uhngix̂ matax̂. A brother has a sister. 
Asxinum huyuu ayuxtakux̂. The girl's brother is out in a boat. 

huzux̂ everybody; everything 
huzus all 
huzuu all of it; the whole 
huzuĝil being altogether 
huzuugizaa absolutely all of it 
I
ichaagidal be flat (of stone, land); thin (of skin, booklet) 
Chiinkax̂ ichaaqidakux̂. The sheet metal is thin.
ichaxs drips 
ichagikux̂ drip 
Taangax̂ ichagikux̂. The water is dripping. 
ichx̂ul wipe the posterior 
ichx̂uusix̂ toilet paper 
Txin ichx̂ul taaman anqada. Wipe your posterior before getting up. 
Ichx̂uusix̂ inal ax̂takux̂. The toilet paper is all gone.
ichingul feel chilly 

Ichingul hingamax̂t? Are you feeling chilly?
idaĝalakan be known 
Amilaayax̂ idaĝalakan tunux̂taalazax̂. We know and speak English.
idax̂talakan know 
idax̂taasalakan know that 
Ting idax̂taĝulax̂t? Do you know me?
idaqaĝilakan be clever; intelligent 
Idaqaĝiĝulax̂t? Are you clever?
idgis pull out 
idgitil pull out 
Dux̂tax̂ chagim ilagaan idgitikuq. I pulled the hook out of the halibut. 
idĝus swallow 
idĝutil swallow
idigal be sweet 
Saaxarax̂ idigakux̂. The sugar is sweet.
idigasix̂ anus 
Anĝaĝinas huzungis idigasix̂ matas. Every person has an anus.
iduĝis inside of chest 
Iduĝining hixsxakus. I have heartburn.
igachix̂ sinew 
Igachix̂ tungaĝikux̂. The sinew is strong. 
igaĝil saw 
igax̂s saw 

igaĝiiluĝis sawhorse 
igaĝilsix̂ saw 
Hlaning saxtalakan iklax̂ igaĝil qilax̂sis. My boys were not lazy about sawing wood this morning. 
Igaĝiisim itxalax̂tangis malgax̂. There are different kinds of saws. 
igal take off; take flight; get out 
igadux snowstorm 
igax̂tal fly 
igax̂tax̂ airplane 
iganax̂ cliff 
igasix̂ wing 
Igasix̂ qakas aqadaguung mitiisix̂tazaq. A wing was dried then it was used as a broom.
igdagil to drill 
igdagusix̂ drill (noun) 
Unangax̂ igdagusix̂ agux̂tal igdagusazanax̂. Natives made drills and drilled with them. 
Amilaayam igdagusii wan liidazax̂. The white man's drill looks like this.
igluxs to stumble 
iglugikux̂ to stumble 
Qiigas igluxs ayukux̂. He tripped over the grass and fell.
iglugax̂ hide; skin 
isuĝim igluqaa seal hide 
qawam igluqangis sea lion hides 
iqluqaasal cover (a boat with skin) 

Tachim ayagax̂ igluqax̂ midalinaa ukux̂taĝulaq. I've never seen a woman clean a hide before. 
ignax̂ weight 
ignaĝilakan be light 
ignatul be heavy 
Quganax̂ ignatukux̂. The rock is heavy.
iĝas get scared; be frightened 
iĝatul be afraid; be timid; wild 
Sax̂ iĝas iganikuq. I scared the duck into flight.
ignil let go; release; let depart 
ignix̂tal let go for awhile 
Hingan ignida. Leave it there. 
igul pull or take out 
igux̂tal have taken out 
igus, igutikux̂ lengthen; piece out 
Chahmas iguda. Take out the dishes. (Set the table)
ixchxa slender connection 
ixchxii slender connection 
kitam ixchxii ankle 

chang ixchxii my wrist 
ixchximuudax̂ side of neck 
Ixchximuudang nanakux̂. I have a stiff neck.
ixs go back 
igikux̂ heads homeward 
ixchil go home 
ixchichx̂il send back 
Tayaĝux̂ ixs tanaaĝakux̂. The man returned. 
Tax̂tikux̂ taaman ixchil saĝanax̂. He went home when it was getting late yesterday. 
Hlax̂ ixchichx̂ikuq. I am sending the boy home. 
ixsal calm down 
ixsax̂tal calm down for awhile 
Slax̂ ixsax̂takux̂. Apparently the storm has ceased for awhile.
ixsil slow down (speed) 
Ayx̂aan ixsida. Slow your motor down.
ixtix̂ pit; house pit 
Ixtim ilan saĝakuq. I am sleeping in the house pit.
iĝaĝal be feared 
Tayaĝux̂ iĝaĝakux̂. The man is feared.
iĝax̂tal fear; be afraid of 

Iĝax̂takung. I am afraid of it. 
iĝanal be terrible; terrifying; rough; bad; wicked 
iĝanaalal be scolded 
iĝanaasal scold 
Alaĝux̂ iĝanakux̂. The sea is rough. 
Iĝatukuq. I am scared.
iĝamaĝal be liked 
iĝamanal be good; nice; righteous; useful; fit; calm; be well 
iĝamanalakax̂ be bad; ugly; in a bad condition 
iĝamanaalal be treated well 
iĝamanaasal be good, nice, with respect to; treat well 
Iĝamaĝal ngaan tunuĝakux̂. He was spoken to in a very friendly way.
iĝayul be respectful; humble 
iĝayux̂tal respect 
Iĝayux̂takung. I respect him very much.
iĝiĝidal be thin; slender 
iĝiĝidas: txin iĝiĝidas become thin; slender 
Tayaĝux̂ iĝiĝidal qayakux̂. The man is tall and slender.
iĝilax̂ skin boat 
Iĝilax̂ agulgaa awax̂ amasukux̂. It must be a lot of work to make a skin boat. 
ix̂chix̂ worm 
Ix̂chis tanam ilan alanalakaĝis. There are lots of worms.
ika right over there 
ikan that one right over there 

ikang right over there 
ikaaĝal get beyond 
ikaaĝax̂taasal lie or go across 
iikaanul lie crossways 
iikaanus put crossways 
Ayx̂aasix̂ ikang akux̂. The boat is right over there.
iklax̂ firewood 
iklal put firewood in (stove) 
iiklaaygis pieces of wood ready for use (driftwood) 
Plitax̂ iklada. Put some firewood in the stove. 
iku over there; right aside 
ikun the one over there 
ikung over there 
ikuux from over there 
Ikungudaĝan huyaasada. Take it aside in that direction.
ikul turn around 
ikudgul turn; convert 
ikus turn around; turn inside out 
Paltuun ikux̂takux̂. Your jacket is inside out. 

ilaa some part of it or him, her 
Chagim ilaa ngus achxuĝakux̂. I was given a part of a halibut.
ilaanux̂ relative 
ilaanuning my relatives 
Ilaanuning iĝamax̂tazaq. I like my relatives.
ilax̂tal have or treat as a friend or companion; be friendly to; love 
Ayagang ilax̂takuq. I love my wife.
ilamal give more 
Chadux̂ ilamakuq. I put more fuel into the tank.
ilahligan just to; only there 
Atx̂am ilahligan itx̂aygis akus. Just around Atka there are reindeer.
ilgal to look for; search 
Alqux̂ ilgal hingaliidax̂ agux̂tax̂t? What are you looking for? 
Qayam kangan itx̂aygis ilgal aaĝakux̂. He looked on top of the hills for reindeer and saw none.
ilgix̂ smell; stench 
ilgaĝil stink; spoiled 
Ulux̂ txin ilgaĝil ax̂takux̂. The meat has spoiled.
ilgung my grandchild 
Tachim ilgux̂ mataĝulaq. I don't have a grandchild yet. 

ilidax̂ front side 
ilidaa its front side 
ilidan on the front side of it 
Qayam ilidaa chatakuq. I am sliding on the front side of the hill.
ilim-hadaa the inside 
ilim hadan inside 
ilim hadagaan from within 
Ayx̂aasix̂ ilim hadagaan hitikux̂. The boat is approaching from within the bay.
imas yell; holler; shout 
imatil yell; holler; shout 
imachx̂il shout; holler 
Anĝaĝinax̂ imatil ting hataĝnikux̂. I got startled when someone yelled. 
Ayagax̂ imachx̂ikux̂. The woman is shouting.
imdal fill; put something into 
imdaĝil have contents; be pregnant 
imdax̂taasal have filled with 
imdaasal fill with 
Vidramaan taangax̂ imdaasakux̂. He/she fills the bucket with water.
imlax̂ gorge 
Imlax̂ qakuutxakux̂. The gorge is deep.
imlix̂ hair 
Imlix̂ isiikax̂t ii? Can you cut hair? 

ims turn to the side 
imil turn to the side 
imsxal be turned around 
Ayx̂aasix̂ imsxakux̂. The boat is turned on its side.
imul take around 
imudigal be round 
imudigas: txin imudigas get round 
imunaa its surrounding 
Aĝadgix̂ imudigakux̂. The sun is round. 
imus, imutil go around; surround 
imutal go or be round 
imyaĝix̂ fishline for deep sea fishing 
imyax̂s fish with a fishline 
Imyaĝikuq. I am deep sea fishing. 
Imyaĝix̂ haang tugikux̂. The fishline is stretched out.
ihmil be torn off 
ihmis, ihmitil tear off 
Bumaagix̂ ihmisxakux̂. The paper was torn off.
ihmiisis shoelaces 
Iihmiisingis adulakaĝis. The shoelaces are short. 

inaayul does not want people around him 
inaayux̂tal does not want anyone to be there 
inaayuĝal be rejected 
Ting inaayux̂tat? Don't you want me around?
inal end; come to an end 
inadgul finish 
inax̂tal have come to an end; be through 
inas finish (work); pass to the end (the summer); finish doing something 
Hilaqulis inakus. The book is finished.
inaqang I myself 
inaqamis you yourself 
inaqamchix, inaqaam he himself; she herself 
inaqamchix you yourself (pl) 
inaqaam he himself; she herself
in'gaam once in awhile; for awhile 
In' gaam hingamazax̂. Once in awhile it does that. (motor, weather)
inix̂sil feel well; be happy; rejoice 
inix̂sinax̂ joy 
inix̂sital: txin inix̂sital be happy; rejoice 
Inix̂sikuq. I am happy. 
Inix̂sitaasal. Receive it with gladness.
inimaan in vain; for nothing 

Inimaan ayuxtakuq. I went out for nothing.
inkax̂ sky 
inkamiiĝux̂ cloud 
Inkax̂ hakaatxakux̂. The sky is high. 
Inkamiiĝum qaxchikdaa haqakux̂. The black cloud is coming. 
Inkamiiĝus inkam ilan akus. There are clouds in the sky. 
inkal hang 
inkas, inkatil hang up 
inkachaĝil, inkatiĝil be hanged 
inkatal have hung up; have hanging 
Furaasking inkakux̂. My hat is hanging up.
inqil fall on 
Inqil ayukuq. I fell down.
inux̂ piece of food 
inul put (food) in his mouth 
inuqaĝichx̂izal give communion 
Tamaakax̂ inux̂takux̂. He has tobbacco in his mouth.
inga right there in front 
ingan that one right there 
ingang right there 
ingangudaĝan in that direction; away from here 
Ingang aĝada. Put it right there.

ingachix̂ married couple 
Ingachix̂ haqakux̂. The couples are coming. 
ingatux̂ red-faced cormorant 
Ingatux̂ chlaĝikux̂. The cormorant dived under.
ingix̂ fish dip net 
Ingix̂ achixaaluĝim ulagan ilan agunaq. I made a dip net at the schoolhouse.
ingisxix̂ owner 
Ingisxiĝikux̂. It has an owner.
ingiyux̂ living human body 
Qaataa ingiyuun? Where is your body?
inglaakus beard; moustache 
Inglaakuning adukus. My beard is long. 
inglus leader; hookline 
Yaarusam inglungis tungaĝikus. The halibut skate leaders are strong.
ingsal go backwards 
Ayx̂aasix̂ ingsakux̂. The boat is going backwards.
ingtix̂ blanket 
Ingtix̂ huĝnaazazax̂. The blanket is usually warm.
iqanax̂ old woman 
Iqanax̂ aqlakux̂. The old woman is angry.

iqux̂ corner 
iquĝii its corner 
Ulam iquĝii umnalakax̂. The corner of the house is drafty.
iqyax̂ kayak 
iiqyaadal to ride in a boat 
Iqyax̂ ayx̂aalaa tachim haqatalakax̂t. You don't know how to drive a kayak yet. 
is fall; drop down 
itil fall 
ital be set out 
Yaarusax̂ itakux̂. The fishline is set out. 
itxil drop; let drop 
itxidgul drop several 
itxisxal be dropped 
itxital drop temporarily 
itux̂sal drop 
Alqux̂ itxil hamaliidax̂ agux̂t? What did you drop that made all that noise?
isal break; become broken (rope); get across (river) 
isax̂tal be cut; have a cut across it 
Qidux̂ isax̂takux̂. The rope is broken.
isxax̂ bed; mattress 
Isxax̂ ngus tayaatukuq. I want to buy a bed for myself. 
Isxax̂ huuĝuzuuzal huĝnaazazak. The bed is soft and warm. 

isxaĝil lie in bed (sick) 
isxax̂sil make a bed; nest 
isxax̂s, isxatil to bury 
Asx̂aaĝix̂ isxaĝikux̂. The sick person is in bed.
isxanal change; make different 
isxanaasal exchange 
isxanaasis change of clothes 
isxanaĝikux̂ it is changed 
isxanax̂tal change 
Chux̂taqaning isxanakuq. I changed my clothes. 
Isxanaasining huzungis chx̂uuqulikus. All my change of clothes are dirty.
isil cut; make a cut into; cut across; slice bread 
Ulux̂ isil ting achxukux̂. He cut up some meat then gave me some. 
Qax̂ isikux̂. He/she cuts fish.
isux̂ hair seal 
isuĝix̂ hair seal 
isuĝis plural form 
isuĝaadax̂ young seal 
isuĝiigamax grown up seal 
isuĝnaax̂s hunt seals 
isux̂saĝul hunting seals 
Isux̂ ii al wa? Is this a seal? 

Isux̂ txin sakaaĝatal saĝakux̂. The seal slept peacefully. 
isuĝim igluqagan bruukii seal skin pants 
Isuĝim igluqagan bruukii huĝnaazazax̂. The seal skin pants are warm.
itaangix̂ the first 
itaangil be the first 
Itaangikuq. I am first.
itaangis doing first; ahead; before something else is done 
Itaangis txin hamaaĝatikux̂. He got there first.
ital contain; have in it; have on board; set 
Ulux̂ isil ting achxukux̂. The cup contains water.
itxan apart; in or at different places 
itxaan apart 
itxaanul go to a different place or different places 
itxaanux̂tal go to different places 
Itxaan aĝada. Put it in a different place. 
itxax̂tal be different; extra 
itxax̂tazax̂ he is different from others; is a peculiar guy 
itxalax̂tal be different; various
itxul comb 
itxuusix̂ fine tooth comb 
Ayagax̂ txin itxukux̂. The woman is combing her hair. 
Itxuusix̂ wang aĝil angaling qaataa? Where is the comb that I put here? 

itx̂aa its side 
itx̂aasix̂ collar 
Ayx̂aasim itx̂aa tungaĝilakax̂. The side of the boat is weak.
itx̂aygix̂ reindeer 
itx̂ayginaax̂s hunt reindeer 
itx̂aygitxaĝil get; kill a reindeer 
Itx̂aygix̂ chiidaan as qaqamiiĝukux̂. A reindeer is searching for food with its fawn. 
Itx̂aygix̂ kiiĝuusix̂ hangakux̂. The reindeer is climbing the mountain.
itikaalux̂ stem, stalk of wild parsnip 
itikaalum tuutx̂aa dry stem of wild parsnip 
Itikaalum tuutx̂aa adukux̂. The dry stem of wild parsnip is long.
itmalix̂ post for tying boats 
Itmaling sixsakux̂. My post broke.
itus fish spear with three teeth 
Itus suĝal qas lalgazas. The fish spear is used for catching fish. 
Iyuulix̂ July 
Iyuulix̂ saaqudgim tugidaa ax̂. July is a summer month.
Iyuunix̂ June 
Iyuunix̂ qanikinga tugidaa ax̂. June is a spring month.
izanaĝulax known 
izanaqadal become known 

Hamang izamaĝulax. It is easy to find. (something you are looking for) 
ichaagidal be flat (of stone, land); thin (of skin, booklet) 
Chiinkax̂ ichaaqidakux̂. The sheet metal is thin.
ichaxs drips 
ichagikux̂ drip 
Taangax̂ ichagikux̂. The water is dripping. 
ichx̂ul wipe the posterior 
ichx̂uusix̂ toilet paper 
Txin ichx̂ul taaman anqada. Wipe your posterior before getting up. 
Ichx̂uusix̂ inal ax̂takux̂. The toilet paper is all gone.
ichingul feel chilly 
Ichingul hingamax̂t? Are you feeling chilly?
idaĝalakan be known 
Amilaayax̂ idaĝalakan tunux̂taalazax̂. We know and speak English.
idax̂talakan know 
idax̂taasalakan know (that) 
Ting idax̂taĝulax̂t? Do you know me?
idaqaĝilakan be clever; intelligent 

Idaqaĝiĝulax̂t? Are you clever?
idgis pull out 
idgitil pull out 
Dux̂tax̂ chagim ilagaan idgitikuq. I pulled the hook out of the halibut. 
idĝus swallow 
idĝutil swallow
idigal be sweet 
Saaxarax̂ idigakux̂. The sugar is sweet.
idigasix̂ anus 
Anĝaĝinas huzungis idigasix̂ matas. Every person has an anus.
iduĝis inside of chest 
Iduĝining hixsxakus. I have heartburn.
igachix̂ sinew 
Igachix̂ tungaĝikux̂. The sinew is strong. 
igaĝil saw 
igax̂s saw 
igaĝiiluĝis sawhorse 
igaĝilsix̂ saw 
Hlaning saxtalakan iklax̂ igaĝil qilax̂sis. My boys were not lazy about sawing wood this morning. 
Igaĝiisim itxalax̂tangis malgax̂. There are different kinds of saws. 

igal take off; take flight; get out 
igadux snowstorm 
igax̂tal fly 
igax̂tax̂ airplane 
iganax̂ cliff 
igasix̂ wing 
Igasix̂ qakas aqadaguung mitiisix̂tazaq. A wing was dried then it was used as a broom.
igdagil to drill 
igdagusix̂ drill (noun) 
Unangax̂ igdagusix̂ agux̂tal igdagusazanax̂. Natives made drills and drilled with them. 
Amilaayam igdagusii wan liidazax̂. The white man's drill looks like this.
igluxs to stumble 
iglugikux̂ to stumble 
Qiigas igluxs ayukux̂. He tripped over the grass and fell.
iglugax̂ hide; skin 
isuĝim igluqaa seal hide 
qawam igluqangis sea lion hides 
iqluqaasal cover (a boat with skin) 
Tachim ayagax̂ igluqax̂ midalinaa ukux̂taĝulaq. I've never seen a woman clean a hide before. 
ignax̂ weight 
ignaĝilakan be light 
ignatul be heavy 

Quganax̂ ignatukux̂. The rock is heavy.
iĝas get scared; be frightened 
iĝatul be afraid; be timid; wild 
Sax̂ iĝas iganikuq. I scared the duck into flight.
ignil let go; release; let depart 
ignix̂tal let go for awhile 
Hingan ignida. Leave it there. 
igul pull or take out 
igux̂tal have taken out 
igus, igutikux̂ lengthen; piece out 
Chahmas iguda. Take out the dishes. (Set the table)
ixchxa slender connection 
ixchxii slender connection 
kitam ixchxii ankle 
chang ixchxii my wrist 
ixchximuudax̂ side of neck 
Ixchximuudang nanakux̂. I have a stiff neck.
ixs go back 
igikux̂ heads homeward 
ixchil go home 

ixchichx̂il send back 
Tayaĝux̂ ixs tanaaĝakux̂. The man returned. 
Tax̂tikux̂ taaman ixchil saĝanax̂. He went home when it was getting late yesterday. 
Hlax̂ ixchichx̂ikuq. I am sending the boy home. 
ixsal calm down 
ixsax̂tal calm down for awhile 
Slax̂ ixsax̂takux̂. Apparently the storm has ceased for awhile.
ixsil slow down (speed) 
Ayx̂aan ixsida. Slow your motor down.
ixtix̂ pit; house pit 
Ixtim ilan saĝakuq. I am sleeping in the house pit.
iĝaĝal be feared 
Tayaĝux̂ iĝaĝakux̂. The man is feared.
iĝax̂tal fear; be afraid of 
Iĝax̂takung. I am afraid of it. 
iĝanal be terrible; terrifying; rough; bad; wicked 
iĝanaalal be scolded 
iĝanaasal scold 
Alaĝux̂ iĝanakux̂. The sea is rough. 
Iĝatukuq. I am scared.
iĝamaĝal be liked 
iĝamanal be good; nice; righteous; useful; fit; calm; be well 

iĝamanalakax̂ be bad; ugly; in a bad condition 
iĝamanaalal be treated well 
iĝamanaasal be good, nice, with respect to; treat well 
Iĝamaĝal ngaan tunuĝakux̂. He was spoken to in a very friendly way.
iĝayul be respectful; humble 
iĝayux̂tal respect 
Iĝayux̂takung. I respect him very much.
iĝiĝidal be thin; slender 
iĝiĝidas: txin iĝiĝidas become thin; slender 
Tayaĝux̂ iĝiĝidal qayakux̂. The man is tall and slender.
iĝilax̂ skin boat 
Iĝilax̂ agulgaa awax̂ amasukux̂. It must be a lot of work to make a skin boat. 
ix̂chix̂ worm 
Ix̂chis tanam ilan alanalakaĝis. There are lots of worms.
ika right over there 
ikan that one right over there 
ikang right over there 
ikaaĝal get beyond 
ikaaĝax̂taasal lie or go across 
iikaanul lie crossways 
iikaanus put crossways 
Ayx̂aasix̂ ikang akux̂. The boat is right over there.
iklax̂ firewood 
iklal put firewood in (stove) 

iiklaaygis pieces of wood ready for use (driftwood) 
Plitax̂ iklada. Put some firewood in the stove. 
iku over there; right aside 
ikun the one over there 
ikung over there 
ikuux from over there 
Ikungudaĝan huyaasada. Take it aside in that direction.
ikul turn around 
ikudgul turn; convert 
ikus turn around; turn inside out 
Paltuun ikux̂takux̂. Your jacket is inside out. 
ilaa some part of it or him, her 
Chagim ilaa ngus achxuĝakux̂. I was given a part of a halibut.
ilaanux̂ relative 
ilaanuning my relatives 
Ilaanuning iĝamax̂tazaq. I like my relatives.
ilax̂tal have or treat as a friend or companion; be friendly to; love 
Ayagang ilax̂takuq. I love my wife.

ilamal give more 
Chadux̂ ilamakuq. I put more fuel into the tank.
ilahligan just to; only there 
Atx̂am ilahligan itx̂aygis akus. Just around Atka there are reindeer.
ilgal to look for; search 
Alqux̂ ilgal hingaliidax̂ agux̂tax̂t? What are you looking for? 
Qayam kangan itx̂aygis ilgal aaĝakux̂. He looked on top of the hills for reindeer and saw none.
ilgix̂ smell; stench 
ilgaĝil stink; spoiled 
Ulux̂ txin ilgaĝil ax̂takux̂. The meat has spoiled.
ilgung my grandchild 
Tachim ilgux̂ mataĝulaq. I don't have a grandchild yet. 
ilidax̂ front side 
ilidaa its front side 
ilidan on the front side of it 
Qayam ilidaa chatakuq. I am sliding on the front side of the hill.
ilim-hadaa the inside 
ilim hadan inside 
ilim hadagaan from within 
Ayx̂aasix̂ ilim hadagaan hitikux̂. The boat is approaching from within the bay.
imas yell; holler; shout 
imatil yell; holler; shout 

imachx̂il shout; holler 
Anĝaĝinax̂ imatil ting hataĝnikux̂. I got startled when someone yelled. 
Ayagax̂ imachx̂ikux̂. The woman is shouting.
imdal fill; put something into 
imdaĝil have contents; be pregnant 
imdax̂taasal have filled with 
imdaasal fill with 
Vidramaan taangax̂ imdaasakux̂. He/she fills the bucket with water.
imlax̂ gorge 
Imlax̂ qakuutxakux̂. The gorge is deep.
imlix̂ hair 
Imlix̂ isiikax̂t ii? Can you cut hair? 
ims turn to the side 
imil turn to the side 
imsxal be turned around 
Ayx̂aasix̂ imsxakux̂. The boat is turned on its side.
imul take around 
imudigal be round 
imudigas: txin imudigas get round 
imunaa its surrounding 
Aĝadgix̂ imudigakux̂. The sun is round. 
imus, imutil go around; surround 

imutal go or be round 
imyaĝix̂ fishline for deep sea fishing 
imyax̂s fish with a fishline 
Imyaĝikuq. I am deep sea fishing. 
Imyaĝix̂ haang tugikux̂. The fishline is stretched out.
ihmil be torn off 
ihmis, ihmitil tear off 
Bumaagix̂ ihmisxakux̂. The paper was torn off.
ihmiisis shoelaces 
Iihmiisingis adulakaĝis. The shoelaces are short. 
inaayul does not want people around him 
inaayux̂tal does not want anyone to be there 
inaayuĝal be rejected 
Ting inaayux̂tat? Don't you want me around?
inal end; come to an end 
inadgul finish 
inax̂tal have come to an end; be through 
inas finish (work); pass to the end (the summer); finish doing something 
Hilaqulis inakus. The book is finished.
inaqang I myself 
inaqamis you yourself 
inaqamchix, inaqaam he himself; she herself 
inaqamchix you yourself (pl) 

inaqaam he himself; she herself
in'gaam once in awhile; for awhile 
In' gaam hingamazax̂. Once in awhile it does that. (motor, weather)
inix̂sil feel well; be happy; rejoice 
inix̂sinax̂ joy 
inix̂sital: txin inix̂sital be happy; rejoice 
Inix̂sikuq. I am happy. 
Inix̂sitaasal. Receive it with gladness.
inimaan in vain; for nothing 
Inimaan ayuxtakuq. I went out for nothing.
inkax̂ sky 
inkamiiĝux̂ cloud 
Inkax̂ hakaatxakux̂. The sky is high. 
Inkamiiĝum qaxchikdaa haqakux̂. The black cloud is coming. 
Inkamiiĝus inkam ilan akus. There are clouds in the sky. 
inkal hang 
inkas, inkatil hang up 
inkachaĝil, inkatiĝil be hanged 
inkatal have hung up; have hanging 
Furaasking inkakux̂. My hat is hanging up.
inqil fall on 
Inqil ayukuq. I fell down.

inux̂ piece of food 
inul put (food) in his mouth 
inuqaĝichx̂izal give communion 
Tamaakax̂ inux̂takux̂. He has tobbacco in his mouth.
inga right there in front 
ingan that one right there 
ingang right there 
ingangudaĝan in that direction; away from here 
Ingang aĝada. Put it right there.
ingachix̂ married couple 
Ingachix̂ haqakux̂. The couples are coming. 
ingatux̂ red-faced cormorant 
Ingatux̂ chlaĝikux̂. The cormorant dived under.
ingix̂ fish dip net 
Ingix̂ achixaaluĝim ulagan ilan agunaq. I made a dip net at the schoolhouse.
ingisxix̂ owner 
Ingisxiĝikux̂. It has an owner.
ingiyux̂ living human body 
Qaataa ingiyuun? Where is your body?
inglaakus beard; moustache 
Inglaakuning adukus. My beard is long. 

inglus leader; hookline 
Yaarusam inglungis tungaĝikus. The halibut skate leaders are strong.
ingsal go backwards 
Ayx̂aasix̂ ingsakux̂. The boat is going backwards.
ingtix̂ blanket 
Ingtix̂ huĝnaazazax̂. The blanket is usually warm.
iqanax̂ old woman 
Iqanax̂ aqlakux̂. The old woman is angry.
iqux̂ corner 
iquĝii its corner 
Ulam iquĝii umnalakax̂. The corner of the house is drafty.
iqyax̂ kayak 
iiqyaadal to ride in a boat 
Iqyax̂ ayx̂aalaa tachim haqatalakax̂t. You don't know how to drive a kayak yet. 
itil fall 
ital be set out 
Yaarusax̂ itakux̂. The fishline is set out. 
itxil drop; let drop 
itxidgul drop several 
itxisxal be dropped 
itxital drop temporarily 
itux̂sal drop 
Alqux̂ itxil hamaliidax̂ agux̂t? What did you drop that made all that noise?
isal break; become broken (rope); get across (river) 
isax̂tal be cut; have a cut across it 
Qidux̂ isax̂takux̂. The rope is broken.
isxax̂ bed; mattress 
Isxax̂ ngus tayaatukuq. I want to buy a bed for myself. 
Isxax̂ huuĝuzuuzal huĝnaazazak. The bed is soft and warm. 
isxaĝil lie in bed (sick) 
isxax̂sil make a bed; nest 
isxax̂s, isxatil to bury 
Asx̂aaĝix̂ isxaĝikux̂. The sick person is in bed.
isxanal change; make different 
isxanaasal exchange 
isxanaasis change of clothes 
isxanaĝikux̂ it is changed 
isxanax̂tal change 
Chux̂taqaning isxanakuq. I changed my clothes. 
Isxanaasining huzungis chx̂uuqulikus. All my change of clothes are dirty.
isil cut; make a cut into; cut across; slice bread 
Ulux̂ isil ting achxukux̂. He cut up some meat then gave me some. 
Qax̂ isikux̂. He/she cuts fish.
isux̂ hair seal 
isuĝix̂ hair seal 

isuĝis plural form 
isuĝaadax̂ young seal 
isuĝiigamax grown up seal 
isuĝnaax̂s hunt seals 
isux̂saĝul hunting seals 
Isux̂ ii al wa? Is this a seal? 
Isux̂ txin sakaaĝatal saĝakux̂. The seal slept peacefully. 
isuĝim igluqagan bruukii seal skin pants 
Isuĝim igluqagan bruukii huĝnaazazax̂. The seal skin pants are warm.
itaangix̂ the first 
itaangil be the first 
Itaangikuq. I am first.
itaangis doing first; ahead; before something else is done 
Itaangis txin hamaaĝatikux̂. He got there first.
ital contain; have in it; have on board; set 
Ulux̂ isil ting achxukux̂. The cup contains water.
itxan apart; in or at different places 
itxaan apart 
itxaanul go to a different place or different places 
itxaanux̂tal go to different places 
Itxaan aĝada. Put it in a different place. 
itxax̂tal be different; extra 
itxax̂tazax̂ he is different from others; is a peculiar guy 

itxalax̂tal be different; various
itxul comb 
itxuusix̂ fine tooth comb 
Ayagax̂ txin itxukux̂. The woman is combing her hair. 
Itxuusix̂ wang aĝil angaling qaataa? Where is the comb that I put here? 
itx̂aa its side 
itx̂aasix̂ collar 
Ayx̂aasim itx̂aa tungaĝilakax̂. The side of the boat is weak.
itx̂aygix̂ reindeer 
itx̂ayginaax̂s hunt reindeer 
itx̂aygitxaĝil get; kill a reindeer 
Itx̂aygix̂ chiidaan as qaqamiiĝukux̂. A reindeer is searching for food with its fawn. 
Itx̂aygix̂ kiiĝuusix̂ hangakux̂. The reindeer is climbing the mountain.
itikaalux̂ stem, stalk of wild parsnip 
itikaalum tuutx̂aa dry stem of wild parsnip 
Itikaalum tuutx̂aa adukux̂. The dry stem of wild parsnip is long.
itmalix̂ post for tying boats 
Itmaling sixsakux̂. My post broke.
itus fish spear with three teeth 
Itus suĝal qas lalgazas. The fish spear is used for catching fish. 
Iyuulix̂ July 

Iyuulix̂ saaqudgim tugidaa ax̂. July is a summer month.
Iyuunix̂ June 
Iyuunix̂ qanikinga tugidaa ax̂. June is a spring month.
izanaĝulax known 
izanaqadal become known 
Hamang izamaĝulax. It is easy to find. (something you are looking for) 
Ii
ii? isn't it? (a question marker) 
Haagat ii? Are you hungry?
iidigidil be ugly; evil; disgusting 
Iidigidikux̂t. You look ugly.
iimis choose 
Anaĝix̂ iimis alanaan suda. Choose something and take what you want.
iiqix̂ corner 
iigii its corner 
liqim ilan changakux̂. He went around to the corner of the bay.
K
kaagnanaax̂s to tease; be mischievous 

Sabaakax̂ kaagnanaaĝasakux̂. He is teasing the dog.
kaaxadgix̂ harlequin duck 
Kaaxadgix̂ uchigikux̂. The harlequin duck is swimming.
kaangul healthy 
txin kaangutikux̂ gets well 
Aniqdux̂ kaangukux̂. The child is healthy.
kaartas playing cards 
kaartal playing cards 
Tayaĝus kaartakus. The men are playing cards.
kachal rock; roll 
Sunax̂ kachakux̂. The ship is rolling. 
Aniqdux̂ kachaasakuq. I am rocking the baby.
kachalal to swing 
Asxinux̂ kachalal txin ugutakux̂. The girl is swinging happily. 
kachil have the hiccups 
Kachikuq. I have the hiccups.
kadan in front of 
Ulam kadan anqax̂takux̂. It stands in front of the house 
Kadaming ayx̂akux̂. It is running in front of me.
kadaa end; point 
yaaĝim kadaa end of a cape 
Karandaasim kadaa chutxidigakux̂. The pencil point is sharp.
kadagaan before 

Alitxum kadagaan Atx̂am kugan anĝaĝinas alanazanaĝulas. There were many people living on Atka before the war.
kadmudax̂s move forward 
Ayx̂aasix̂ kadmudaĝikux̂. The boat is moving forward.
kaduunul move further up front 
Sunax̂ kaduunul hulal ax̂takux̂. Apparently the boat has moved up last night.
kagalux̂ heel 
Kitang kagaluu. My heel hurts. 
kagil dump; sweep 
Qaagudgusix̂ kagikux̂. He is dumping the garbage.
kagnil to make angry 
Ting kagnikuq. I got angry.
kakil look up; rise 
Kakikum sax̂ ukunax̂. He looked up and saw a duck. 
Ayx̂aasix̂ kakikux̂. The boat's bow rises.
kalagax̂ irish lord; sculpin 
Kalagax̂ alaĝum qamdagam ilan azax̂. The Irish lord fish stays in deep water.
kalas drag along the ground 
Itx̂aygix̂ kalas kimusakux̂. He is dragging the reindeer down the hill.
kaliduurax̂ corridor 
Kaliduurax̂ chachiĝikux̂. The corridor is closed.
kalindaarax̂ calendar 
Kalindaarax̂ inkakux̂. The calendar is hanging up. 

kalul to shoot 
Daviidax̂ kalul aaĝazaĝulax. When David shoots, he never misses.
kaluusix̂ ammunition 
Kaluusis inakus. The ammunition is all gone.
kamalus young of the gray crowned rosy finch 
Kamalus igax̂takus. The young gray crowned rosy finches are flying. 
kamgadax̂ Christian 
Kamgadax̂ ax̂t ii? Are you a Christian?
kamgadax̂ to baptize 
kamgadatil to baptize 
Adam kamgadatikuu. He/she is baptized by the priest.
kamgax̂ prayer; holiday 
Kamgax̂ malgakux̂. It is a holiday.
kamgam ulaa house of prayer; church 
Kamgam ulaa haxsax̂takux̂. The house of prayer is open. 
Kamgam ulaa qayam kangan akux̂. The church is on top of the hill. 

kamgal to pray 
Uchiitilam hlaa quyuuĝan kamgakux̂. The teacher's boy is praying before he goes to bed.
kamgix̂ head 
Tayaĝum kamgii ukux̂takuq. I see a man's head.
kamiinax̂ heater 
Kamiinax̂ atalakax̂. The heater is not lit.
kamuudax̂ drawer 
Kamuudax̂ chx̂akux̂. The drawer is full.
kahmagil to shake 
kanaagux̂ ditch; small stream 
Kanaagux̂ chutakux̂. The ditch is clogged.
kanfiixtax̂ candy 
Hlax̂ kanfiixtax̂ laavkim ilagaan tayakux̂. The boy buys candy from the store. 
kanxul collide with 
Txidix kanxul angalis. They collided with each other.
kanuuyax̂ copper 
Puumpax̂ kanuuyam ilagaan aguĝikux̂. The pipe is made out of copper.
kahnuluxs to have a cold 
kahnulugnil catch a cold 
Txin kahnulugninax̂. He caught a cold.

kahnus mucus from the nose 
Kahnus anĝusigam ilagaan igakux̂. Mucus is coming out his nose. 
kahnulil to blow the nose 
Kayutul txin kahnulil akux̂ siisx̂inax̂. She blew her nose so hard that she had a nose bleed.
kangaa top; upper part; peak 
ulam kangaa upper part of house 
kiiĝuusim kangaa top of mountain 
kangan on top of 
kangaan from the top of 
kangagaan from the top of 
kangal reach the top 
Kiiĝuusim kangaa qaniixtukux̂. The top of the mountain has lots of snow on it. 
Qayam kangan hakang anqax̂takux̂. He is standing on top of a hill. 
Qayam kangaan kimikux̂. She came down from the top of a hill. 
Qayax̂ hangal kangakux̂. She climbed right to the top of the hill. 
kangayuu upper part of body 
Chagim kangayuu qanguusada. Bring in the upper part of a halibut's body.
kangchix̂ gizzard 
qagmangim kangchii emperor goose's gizzard 
Qagmangim kangchii qaatunazax̂. The emperor goose's gizzard is good eating.
kangul have a purpose 
Asla kangul hingamanaa haqatalgalakax̂. We don't know what its purpose is.
kahngadgix̂ a certain kind of seaweed 

Chunixsam nagan kahngadgis alanalakaĝis. There are lots of seaweeds in Chunixsax.
kahngiitix̂ pillow 
Kahgiitix̂ huuĝzuuzakux̂. The pillow is soft.
kahngil to fold 
Chx̂uuĝis kahngil iĝamanas aqadagumis kamuudam nagan aĝida. Fold the wash neatly and put it in drawers. 
kahngil to bend 
Saahmix̂ kahngil aguung ting kiduda. Help me when I bend the pipe.
karandaasix̂ pencil 
Karandaasix̂ matakung akux̂ sixsax̂takux̂. I have a pencil but it is broken. 
Karandaasix̂ adukux̂. The pencil is long.
karmaanax̂ pocket 
Karmaanaa tatakux̂. He has a hole in his pocket.
kartiinkax̂ picture 
Kartiinkax̂ stiinam daĝan inkakux̂. The picture is hanging on the wall.
kartuufilax̂ potato 
Kartuufilax̂ angunakux̂. The potato is large.
Kasakax̂ Russian 
Kasakam taangaa akux̂. That is Russian liquor.
kasamix̂ eider duck 
Kasamix̂ taangakux̂. The eider duck is drinking water.
kasul to find 
Qayam kangagaan baankix̂ kasukux̂. He/she found a can on the hill.
kasuqix̂ chiton 
Agux̂ aĝal akuĝaan kasuqis qigunaq. I gathered chitons when the tide went out.
katal touch 

Ting katalagada! Dont touch me!
katxix̂ post 
Katxix̂ hiing chuchagikux̂. There is a post standing there.
katuxs to sway 
Qiigam aduu katugikux̂. The long grass is swaying.
kavkaanax̂ trap 
Uuquchiingis kavkaanalgazax̂. We trap foxes. 
kayagnal heavy 
Hingan quganax̂ kayagnakux̂. That rock is heavy. 
Kumsiĝang kayagnakux̂. I am heavy to lift.
kay also; too 
Txin kay hiĝakux̂. You were called also.
kayuxtax̂ sinker 
Kayuxtax̂ imyaĝim angtan akux̂. A sinker is attached to the fishline.
kayuĝnal difficult; hard 
Isuĝis kalulgangis kayuĝnakus. Seals are difficult to shoot.
kayus muscles; strength 
Tayaĝum kayungis kayutukux̂. The man is strong.
kayuĝilakan weak 
kayuĝiqadakux̂ gets weak 
Kayuĝiqadakuq. I am getting weak.
kayutul strong 
Kayutul sayukuu. He is pulling hard (on the oar, rope, fishline).

kdax icicle; ice 
kdal (icicle) cover with ice 
kdaĝil (icicle) be covered with ice 
Kdax̂ ulam kangan akux̂. There's an icicle on the house. 
kdam ilan chalil to ice fish 
Chuxchas kdax̂ tatxil chalizas. Eskimos make a hole in the ice and fish. 
kdam liizii skate 
Kdam liizikix kugan ayx̂akux̂. He's ice skating. 
kdam tanĝaaĝii polar bear 
Kdam tanĝaaĝii quhmazax̂. The polar bear is white. 
kdam ukduu ice block 
Kdam ukdungis igaĝil tumsada. Saw ice blocks and put them away. 
kdangix̂ dolphin 
Kdangix̂ sunam kadan ayx̂akux̂. The dolphin is swimming in front of the ship. 
kichignal itchy 
kichixsil be itchy 
Chang kichignakux̂. My hand is itchy. 
Kichixsil ting qiimayaagikuq. I am scratching myself because I itch.
kiduxs to sink 
Sunax̂ kidugnax̂; kiduxtakux̂. The boat sank; is sunk

kixs to bite 
kixtal bite; hold in mouth 
kiglux̂s chewing 
Sabaakax̂ ting kigikux̂. The dog bit me. 
Qanglaaĝix̂ ulux̂ kixtal igax̂takux̂. The crow is flying with a piece of meat in his mouth. 
Sabaakax̂ qagnax̂ kigluĝikux̂. The dog is chewing on the bone.
kiiĝuusix̂ mountain 
Kiiĝuusim qaniixtugan qayaa hangakux̂. He is climbing a mountain that is snowy and high. 
kiiĝuusim qaniigaĝii snow-covered mountain 
Kiiĝuusim qaniigaĝii hangalagada. Don't climb the snow covered mountain.
kiikax̂ birthday cake 
Kiikax̂ amiilayus ilagaan hix̂saalanax̂. We learned about cake from white people. 
kiin who 
kiinkus who 
Kiin ax̂? Who is it? 
Kiinkus as? Who are they? 
Kiin asax̂tax̂t? What is your name?
kikagnal dirty 
Alqus makux̂t kikagnal hingamax̂t? What are you doing that you get so dirty?
kikagnaliisix̂ coveralls 
Awalgal aguun kikagnaliisix̂ chuĝazax̂. Coveralls are worn when one works. 

kimlax̂ stomach 
kimlaluxs diarrhea 
kimlatul have a big stomach 
Kimlang chx̂akux̂. My stomach is full. 
Kimlaluxs hulakux̂. He had diarrhea last night. 
Tayaĝux̂ kimlatukux. The man has a big stomach.
kims go down; descend 
kimil descend 
kimusal bring down 
kimtil take down 
Igax̂tax̂ kims tagakux̂. The plane decends for landing. 
Naviiskim hadagaan yaasikax̂ kimusada. Bring the box down from the attic. 
Ukuusxix̂ kimtikux̂. He pulls down the window.
kinil stoop; bow down 
Txin kinikux̂. He bows down. 
kinital bowed position 
Txin kinital aangsutikux̂. He is picking berries in a bowed position.
kinugas cache 
kinugax̂tal have as a cache 
Kinugas hamang ngus axtakuq. I am keeping the food for myself. 

kingdax̂ crow berry patch 
Aangsum kingdaa hiing akux̂. There is a crow berry patch over there.
kingii younger brother; younger sister 
kinguuĝix̂ younger; youngest 
Kinging ulaĝikux̂. My younger brother is home. 
Huyuun kinguuĝii alqux̂ asax̂tal? What is your younger brother's name?
kingtix̂ bank (river) 
Chiĝanam kingtii qayakux̂. The bank of the river is high.
kinguunul become smaller; weaker 
Tunungis txidix kinguunuqalinas. Their voices became weaker.
kipriiyas fireweed 
Kipriiyas hulax̂tal aguun qakiidas kuuĝazas. When the fireweed blooms, the silver salmon arrives. 
kitax̂ foot; back flipper (seal, sea lion) 
kital to kick 
Kitax̂ nasxaa iĝamanazaĝulax. It isn't good to hurt your feet. 
Quganax̂ kitakux̂. He kicked the rock.
kitxil take out 
Qalgadax̂ tanasxan kitxil angalix̂. He dropped off food at the camp.
kitil go down; drain out 

Hanĝii kitikux̂. The waves have calmed down.
kitux̂ louse; bug 
Kitux̂ aygagikux̂. The bug is moving along.
kliyaankix̂ linoleum 
stuuluĝim kliyaankii table cloth 
Kliyaankix̂ uĝax̂takux̂. The linoleum is worn out.
klul get there 
Qagaa-hadan klux̂tanax̂. He took a trip to the east.
kluuchix̂ key 
Kluuchix̂ matakung ulang haxsiikalakax̂. I have a key that can't open my house.
kluuchinas oarlocks 
Ayx̂aasim daĝan kluuchinas akus. There are oarlocks on the boat.
kraanax̂ faucet 
Kraanam ilagaan taangax̂ hyuzax̂. The water pours out of a faucet.
kraasxix̂ paint 
kraasxil to paint 
Ulang kraasxil aguung kam chumnuxtikuq. If I painted my house I would paint it yellow. 
Kraasxix̂ qakakux̂. The paint is dry.
kriisax̂ rat 
Kriisax̂ algakuchax̂ akux̂ chxaqalizax̂. The rat is a small animal but it is a robber. 
kriistax̂ cross 
Kamgadas huzungis kriistax̂ chux̂tazas. All Russian Orthodox Christians wear crosses.
krisxix̂ cap; lid 
Butiilkam krisxii qyakux̂. The bottle cap is tight.

krupax̂ rice 
Krupax̂ qangakux̂. The rice is cooked.
kruusnax̂ godparent 
Kruusnaĝit ii? Do you have a godparent?
kuchix̂ boulder 
Kuchis alaĝum achidan akus. There are boulders by the beach.
kuchutux̂ lesser scaup (waterfowl) 
Kuchutux̂ igax̂takux̂. The lesser scaup is flying.
kudux̂ leg 
Kudux̂ atxulingin ilaa ax̂. A leg is part of our body,
kufiinikax̂ coffeepot 
Kufiinikax̂ imdaĝikux̂. The coffeepot is filled.
kufsinax̂ pitcher 
Kufsinax̂ aligikux̂. The pitcher is overflowing. 
kugan on 
kuming on me 
kuum on himself 
kugaan from up on; from his or her 
Asla kugan malgakux̂ anaĝulax. There was nothing one could do to him. 
Vaskrisiiniyam kugan waaĝanax̂. He came here on Sunday. 
Taangax̂ kuum hyutikux̂. He spilled water on himself. 
Sunam kugan hakaaĝakux̂. He climbs on the boat. 

Sunam kugan akux̂. He is on the boat. 
Kuusxix̂ kuming unguchikux̂. The cat is sitting on me. 
Quganam kugaan higitikux̂. He jumped down from the rock. 
Alaĝum kugaan isux̂ mayaax̂takus. We are hunting seal on the water. 
Kitagan kugaan sayuqaa. He is pulling his foot.
kukax̂ grandmother 
kukaa his/her grandmother 
Kukax̂ adang anna ax̂. Grandmother is my father's mother. 
kukmix̂ chunk 
Uuglim kukmii qaxchikdakux̂. The chunk of coal is black.
kukutux̂ young eider duck 
Kukutus anamdix agalan ayx̂akus. The young eiders are following the mother.
kulisax̂ wheel 
Kaaram huzungis kulisax̂ matakus. All cars have wheels.
kulux̂ deep spot; pool 
Chiĝanam kuluu qas itakux̂. There are fish in the deep spot of the creek.
kulukuulux̂ bell 
Achixaaluĝing kulukuulux̂ tugazaĝulax. My school does not ring a bell.
Kuluuzax̂ Indian 
Kuluuzas, Chuxchas, Aligutas Alaxsxim ilagaan angix̂tas. Indians, Eskimos, and Aleuts are from Alaska.
kuluuzam iqyaa canoe 

Kuluuzam iqyaa akux̂. This is an Indian canoe.
kum would 
kam would 
Matal aguung kum imis aĝikung. If I had it I would give it to you.
kumgux̂ skeleton 
"Kumgux̂" asx̂ax̂tam qagnaa ax̂. A skeleton is from a dead animal.
kums pour 
Kuufyax̂ kumikuq. I poured some coffee.
kumsal rise 
Tugidax̂ kumsakux̂. The moon is rising.
kumsil to lift; hold up 
Anaĝim ignatungis kumsil hachiin natiiĝanax̂t. Don't hurt your back lifting heavy things. 
Yaasikax̂ kumsikux̂. He lifted the box. 
kumtxix̂ sand flea 
kutmix̂ sand flea 
Alaĝum achidan kutmis hasinazas. There are lots of sand fleas by the beach.
kuhmuxs to peck 
Kuurichax̂ agitaadaan kuhmugikux̂. The chicken is pecking the other.
kunugyux̂ crested auklet 
Kunugyum unaĝii qaatunakux̂. A cooked crested auklet is good to eat.
kuris cigarettes 
Tayaĝux̂ kuris tayakux̂. The man buys cigarettes.

kuruukax̂ trigger 
Saygis huzungis kuruukax̂ matakus. All guns have triggers on them.
kuu surface 
kung over me 
Quganam kuu agikuq. I passed over the rock. 
Akaluĝim ayx̂aasii kung agikux̂. The car ran over me.
kuuchul to stack 
Hlax̂ iklas kuuchul ax̂takux̂. The boy is stacking the wood. 
kuufyax̂ coffee 
Hlax̂ kuufyax̂ unal ngus haqaasakux̂. A boy made coffee and brought it to me.
kuuxnix̂ kitchen 
Kuuxnim hadan unalgazax̂. The kitchen is used for cooking.
kuuĝal appear 
Aĝadgix̂ kuuĝakux̂. The sun appears.
kuurichax̂ chicken 
Kuurichax̂ saahmlaĝikux. The chicken has eggs.
kuurkax̂ crust; heel of bread 
Xliibam kuurkaa qaatuzaq. I like to eat the heel of bread.
kuusxix̂ cat 
Kuusxix̂ mikakux̂. The cat is playing. 

kuygix̂ hip cf. aaqayax 
Kuyging nanakux̂. My hip hurts.
kuhyux̂ irish lord; bullhead 
Kuhyux̂ qam kamgitugan agalĝilĝux̂ mataa azax̂. A bullhead is a fish with a big head and mouth.
kyax̂s to send out for an errand 
kyax̂tal to send out for an errand 
Kyax̂s hamaanuchx̂il. angaling tachim ukuĝalakax̂. I sent him out for an errand and he hasn't come back yet.
kyux̂ brown mussel 
Kyus waygis ilagaan angunazas. The brown mussels are larger than blue mussels. 
L
laampax̂ lamp (kerosene) 
Laampax̂ adigakux̂ yaa? The lamp is bright, isn't it? 
Laampax̂ atakux̂. The lamp is lit. 

laavkix̂ store 
Laavkix̂ alaĝum achidan akux̂. The store is near the beach.
lagix̂ Aleutian Canadian goose 
Lagix̂ ukux̂takung ting ukux̂tanax̂. I saw the Aleutian Canadian goose and she looked back at me.
lagim ichx̂uusii arctic cotton 
Lagim ichx̂uusingis Atx̂am kugan azas. There is arctic cotton on Atka.
laglax lesser Canada goose 
Laglax igax̂takux̂. The lesser Canadian goose is flying.
lal gather 
Qagmangis kalul lakuq. I shot and gathered lots of geese. 
Qas lakux̂. He is gathering fish. 
Qiigas lakus, They are gathering grass.
lal escape of air 
Sanĝum hugin'gii lakux̂. The air escapes from the inflated sea lion stomach.
lalux̂ yellow (color) cedar wood 
Lalux̂ iklam chumnugii ax̂. A yellow cedar wood is yellow.
lampaadax̂ icon lamp 
Lampaadax̂ kamgam ulagan ilan suĝazax̂. An icon lamp is used in the church.
lastax̂ fermented fur seal flipper; propeller 
Lastax̂ qichikux̂. The propeller is turning. 
Lastax̂ qakux̂. She is eating the fermented flipper.
latux̂ grandfather 

Latux̂ Anang adaa ax̂. Grandfather is my mother's father. 
Latuĝii his or her grandfather 
Hlam latuĝii igaĝikux̂. The boy's grandfather is sawing wood.
liidal resembles; looks like 
lisngil resemble 
Hlax̂ adaan liidakux̂. The boy resembles his father. 
Ukuĝangis amilaayus liidakus. They look like Americans. 
Chix̂taakanax̂ liidakux̂. It looks as though it is going to rain. 
Ayuxtaakaan liidax̂ malgakux̂. Now it looks like it's time for you to go out. 
Agitaadaan lisngikux̂. He resembles his friend.
liidax̂ one or some 
Piitrax̂ masinaĝikux̂, liidax̂ mataaĝing alamakuq. Peter has an outboard motor and I wish I had one too.
liintax̂ ribbon 
Kamgiim kugan liintax̂ chux̂takux̂. She has a ribbon on her head. 
liisnalakax̂ few; rare 
Qax̂ liisnalakax̂. There are very few fish.
liizis skis 
Liizil angaliq. I skied today. 
lil appear; rise 

lix̂tal rise 
Aĝadgix̂ likux̂. The sun rises. 
Quganax̂ lix̂tal sakang akux̂. There is a rock sticking out in the sea.
litil appear; start (wind) 
lital appear; start 
Qagaadaa litil hulal ax̂taaĝutakux̂. This morning the wind started blowing again. 
Nam hadaa lital saĝanaq. Yesterday I went as far as to see the south side of the island.
ludaa his older brother or sister 
ludamiing older than me 
ludaaĝix̂ elder; eldest; greater; greatest 
Asxinum ludaa angunakux̂. The girl's older sister is big. 
Ludamiing axtas iĝayux̂tazaq. I respect those who are older than myself. 
Txin ludaaĝitikux̂. He becomes the greatest.
lukamachix gloves; mittens 
Lukamachim atx̂uĝiĝulangis ama atx̂uĝingis malgax̂. There are gloves without fingers and with fingers. 
Lukamachix chax huĝnatazax. The pair of gloves keeps the hands warm.
lul believe 
luusal believe 
lunalakan unbelievable 
lunil begin to believe 
luniisal begin to believe 
Haman ngaan hix̂takung lunax̂. I told him about it and he believed me. 
Hix̂tananing luusanax̂. He believed everything I said. 
Hix̂tanangis lunalakan. It is unbelievable what he is saying. 
Ngaan tunux̂tahlikung txin lunil angalix̂. I talked him into believing me. 

Igiim luniisal angalli. He started believing him.
lupaatxix̂ shovel 
lupaatxil to shovel 
Lupaatxix̂ suĝal tanax̂ hilgilgazax̂. We use a shovel to dig dirt. 
Ulam chidaĝan qaniigii lupaatxil inatida. Shovel all the snow by the house.
luusxix̂ spoon 
Luusxix̂ sux̂tal asux̂ misada. Stir the pot with the spoon. 
Luusxix̂ suĝal qalgazax̂. A spoon is used for eating.
luukas onions 
Luukas sunam kugan waaĝakus. The onions came on the boat. 
hlaaqudax̂ fur seal 
Hlaaqudax̂ akux̂. It is a fur seal.
hlaĝuudal soothe 
Aniqdux̂ hlaĝuudakux̂. She is soothing the baby.
hlax̂ boy; son 
Hlax̂ kalunaaĝikux̂. The boy is trying to shoot.

M
maadugaax̂ snow bunting 
Maadugaaĝis qayas kangangim azas. The snow buntings are up in the hills.
maaguzax̂ real truth 
Maaguzaaĝan ax̂takux̂. It is the real truth.
maakal be able to do 
Maakal agumis mada. If you think you are able, do it.
maalal be done; we do 
Maalakux̂. We did it. 
Qaatukux̂ maalal qachx̂isxaqax̂. He was hungry so he was fed. (We fed him because he was hungry.)
maamax̂ mother 
Maamax̂ taatang ayagaa ax̂. Mother is my father's wife.
Maartax̂ March 
Maartax̂ qan'gim tugidaa ax̂. March is a winter month.
maasal doing it 
Maasakung. I did it. 
Qaatukux̂ maasal qachx̂ikung. I fed him because he was hungry. (He was hungry so I fed him.)
maaslax̂ butter 
Maaslax̂ wayaam akitukux̂. Butter is costly now. 
Maaslax̂ xliibam kugan akux̂. There is butter on the bread.
maastax̂ mast 

Sunam maastaa qayakux̂. The ship's mast is tall.
maazal get something; not exist 
Imyaĝikux̂ maazanax̂. He had successful fishing. 
maazalakax̂ gone; not there 
Maazaqadanax̂. It disappeared.
machaalkix̂ mop 
Kiin wang machaalkix̂ aĝiisal ax̂taaĝutakux̂? Who left this mop here again?
machx̂il let do 
Ngaan machx̂ikung. I let him do it.
madigal be lucky 
Madigas matikux̂. He was fortunate.
maxaayal to wave 
Qanaanuumis ting maxaayal angalix̂t? Where were you going waving at me earlier?
maĝil have 
Sabaakax̂ maĝikuq. I have a dog. 
max̂sil cleaning; working on 
Qax̂ max̂sikux̂. She is cleaning the fish.
makaakax̂ monkey 
Makaakax̂ algax̂ akux̂. A monkey is an animal.
malaaĝis inflorescence of wild parsnip 
Taaĝan'gim malaaĝingis kuuĝakus. The tops of the wild parsnip are bloomed. 

mal do 
Chaayuutut ii? - Makuq. Do you want to drink tea? Yes I do. 
Makung alakax̂. I have nothing to do. 
Kaagnanaaĝihlix̂ makuq. I am just teasing. 
Aygagiitukux̂ mal aygagnax̂. He wanted to walk, so he did.
malgal to be done; it is 
Slachxizax̂ malgakux̂. It is a nice day. 
Tanasxaadaatunax̂ malgal? Is it good to be camping?
manital proud 
Hlax̂ txin manitakux̂. The boy is proud.
maqaĝilakan it is all right 
Maqaĝiqadakux̂. It is all right now.
maqax̂tal habit of doing something 
Agiidax̂ maqax̂tazakus. They usually go visiting. 
Qax̂ maqax̂tazaqangis. They used to eat them before.
maqdax̂ mammary glands 
maqdal to suck 
Aniqduun maqdachx̂ikux̂. She is breast feeding her baby.
mas to do 
matil to do 
Maaĝan matikux̂. He agrees to do it.
masxal become; it is time to 

Slachxizax̂ masxakux̂. It has become fine weather. 
Aangsusxazaa masxakux̂. It is time for us to start picking berries.
masinas motor 
Masinas ayx̂aasim kugan chitakus. The outboard motor is attached to the stern.
matal to have; to be 
Ulax̂ matakuq. I have a house. 
Qalgaakaan matakux̂. It is edible.
mayaax̂s to hunt; trap animals 
Tayaĝus mayaax̂s qanagzakus. The men trap during the winter.
mazal usually does it 
Kurizax̂ ii? Mazax̂. Does he smoke? Yes, he usually does.
midalil to clean a hide 
Isuĝim igluqaa midalikux̂. He is skinning the seal hide.
midimitx̂ix̂ bufflehead; butterball 
Midimitx̂is igax̂takus. The buffleheads are flying.
migal to hatch 
Kasamix̂ migakux̂. The eider-duck is hatching her eggs.
miilax̂ soap 
Chx̂uuĝiitukuq miilax̂ matalakaq. I want to wash but I don't have any soap.
mikaasix̂ toy 

Qanan mikaasix̂ alat? Which toy do you want?
mikal to play 
mikayngul to be playful 
Ulalĝum nagan mikalgazagan ilan mikal angalix̂. He was playing in a big gymnasium. 
Hlas mikakus. The boys are playing. 
Hmiichix̂ mikaasakus. They are playing with the ball. 
Aniqdux̂ mikayngukux̂. The child is playful.
minuutax̂ minute 
Minuutas aginangis haqatada. Keep track of the minutes.
miqudax̂ pocket knife 
Miqudaan ugunuuĝanax̂t. Don't forget your pocket knife. 
misaayal disturb 
Tingin misaayakux̂. He/she is disturbing us.
misal stir 
Ifraasiyax̂ asux̂ misakux̂. Betsy is stirring the pot. 
Asux̂ misakux̂. She is stirring the pot.
misuukax̂ sack 
Misuukax̂ imdada! Fill the sack.
mitiisix̂ broom 
mitil to sweep 
Mitiisix̂ suĝal mitilgazax̂. A broom is used for sweeping. 

Aanax̂ chamlus mitil ax̂takux̂. Ann is sweeping the floors.
mukax̂ flour 
Mukax̂ suĝal xliibax̂ agulgazax̂. We use flour to bake bread.
mulukax̂ milk 
Aniqdux̂ mulukax̂ alakux̂. The baby wants milk.
mulutuukax hammer 
MuIutuukax̂ suĝal asxus aqisxazax̂. We use a hammer to take off nails. 
mulutuukal to hammer 
Mulutuukal hingamakux̂. He is using a hammer.
muulix̂ butterfly 
Muulix̂ ataqadim hnuuqaayax̂ anax̂. A butterfly was once a cocoon.
muustas bridge 
Muustas iĝax̂takuq. I am afraid of the bridge. 
Muustas chiĝanam qusan akux̂. The bridge is over the creek.

hmachil to get stuck 
Hlax̂ quganam quchigan hmachikux̂. The boy got stuck between the rocks.
hmaadul medium wind 
Hmaadux̂t malgakux̂. It is breezy outside.
hmataayal to catch 
Ramaan hmiichix̂ hmataayal akum aalux̂tanax̂. Raymond smiled when he caught the ball.

hmigalax̂s whistling 
Anĝaĝinam agiitingis hmigalaĝil awazas. Some people like whistling when they work. 
Hmiixaadakus. They are whistling.
hmiichix̂ ball 
Hmiichix̂ mikaasakux̂. He is playing with the ball.
hmiikaayax̂ red sculpin 
Hmiikaayax̂ qalgazax̂. The red sculpin is edible.
hmuqatix̂ gill covering 
Atxidam hmuqatingis qaatunazas. The gill covering of codfish is good eating.

naa hadaa west 
naaĝix̂ western 
naaĝii western side 
naanul going westward 
naatxal more to the west 
Naa hadan ax̂tax̂ malgakux̂. There is a storm from the west. 
Atx̂am naaĝii qayakux̂. The western part of Atka Island is high. 
Slaa naanukux̂. The storm is going westward. 
Slaa naatxakux̂. The wind is more to the west.
naakuvaliinax̂ anvil 
Qaataa haman naakuvaliinax̂? Where is the anvil?
naankal babysit 

Asxinux̂ aniqdux̂ naankakux̂. The girl is babysitting the child.
naartax̂ sled 
Naartax̂ chataalazax̂. The sled is used for sliding.
naga inside 
nagan inside 
nagagaan from inside 
Ayx̂aasim nagan uluudakux̂. Inside of the boat it is colored red. 
Ulam nagagaan hitikux̂. He went out from inside of the house.
nax̂tal have pain 
Kitaan nax̂takux̂. He has pain in his foot. 
nam hadaa south 
Tayaĝus nam hadan ayuxtakus. The men are going hunting on the south side (of the island).
namixs sore muscles 
Anqax̂tal saĝanaq mal namixs gumakuq. I went hiking yesterday and that's why I have sore muscles.
namix̂ vein 
Namis changin daĝan akus. There are veins on our hands.
nanal ache 
nanasal strain 
Kimlang nanakux̂. I have a stomach ache. 

Aniqduum nanaa tutakux̂. She feels labor pains. 
Txin nananikux̂. It started hurting. 
Haĝul txin nanasal. He is straining himself from packing.
nangaa no 
Nangaa! No! 
Anagan ngaan "nangaa" hix̂takuu. His mother said "no" to him.
nas to hurt 
natil to hurt 
nadusal to hurt 
Txin natikux̂. He/she hurt himself herself. 
Ayul kuduun nadusal saĝanax̂. He fell and hurt his leg.
natruskis backpack 
Natruskis haĝux̂tal aygagikux̂. He is packing his backpack.
naviisxix̂ upstairs; attic 
Naviisxix̂ qinganakux̂. The attic is cold.
nidilix̂ week 
Nidilix̂ inakux̂. The week has come to an end.
Niiĝux̂ Atkan 
Niiĝuĝix̂ Atkan 
Niiĝuĝis, Sasxinas, ama Qawalangis huzungis unangas as. The Atkans, Attuan, and the Easterners are all Aleuts.
niivudix̂ seine 
Niivudix̂ qichx̂ital qakatichx̂ida. Spread the net out to dry. 

Daniilax̂ niivudil qaadas lal ii? Did Dan get any dolly varden when he went seining? 
Niivudil qam hasinangis agukus. We caught lots of fish by seining.
nuumirax̂ number 
Nuumiraa chixitida. Put on the number.
nuuznikax̂ outhouse 
Nuuznikax̂ hagyatada. Keep the outhouse clean.
Nuyaabrax̂ November 
Nuyaabrax̂ qan'gim tugidaa ax̂. November is a winter month.
Hn
hnix̂ eel 
Hnix̂ qam iĝiĝidagan aduu ax̂. An eel is skinny and long.
hnul to reach 
hnuusal to reach with; to bring 
Tanadgusim hadan huyal hnunax̂. He reached the village. 
Amlagix̂ hnux̂tax̂tax̂t ii? Have you ever travelled to Amlia? 
Amlagix̂ ngaan hnuusaqangis. They brought it to Amlia. 
Hlax̂ ulaam hadan iklas hnuusakux̂. A boy brought some wood to his home. 

hnuuqaayax̂ maggot 
Hudax̂ txin hnuuqaayalĝikux̂. The dried fish is spoiled by the maggots.

nguu south side 
nguuĝix̂ southern 
nguunul going to the south 
nguutxakux̂ more to the south 
Slaa nguunukux̂. The wind is shifting to the south. 
Nguuĝix̂ aaliisim ilan chalakus. They landed at the southern landing place. 
Slaa nguutxakux̂. The wind is more to the south.

paalinax̂ bowline 
Ayx̂aasim paalinaa adukux̂. The bowline on the boat is long.
paarusax̂ sail 
Sunax̂ paarusaan hangatikux̂. The ship hoists up its sail.
paltux̂ coat 
Paltumis puugachii hachitida. Button up your coat. 
pariixax̂ zipper 

Pariixaan hachitida. Zip up your zipper.
patriitax̂ picture 
Patriitax̂ aqitiqang ukux̂taax̂t. Look at the picture I snapped. 
Patriitax̂ amgix̂sikux̂. The picture is pretty.
piichix̂ oven 
Piichix̂ akinakux̂. The oven is hot.
piilix̂ dust 
Piilix̂ ulam ilan hasinazax̂. There is a lot of dust in the house.
piirichax̂ pepper 
Piirichax̂ qaxchikdakux̂. The pepper is black.
piivax̂ homebrew 
Piivax̂ taangakux̂. She is drinking homebrew.
pirux̂ pen 
Pirux̂ matat ii? Do you have a pen?
pismax̂ letter 
Pismax̂ aluĝasakuq. I am writing a letter.
pistaliitax̂ pistol 
Pistaliitax̂ sux̂tal kamligikux̂. He is shooting with a pistol.
pitruusxis beach greens 
Pitruusxis qam angan qalgaa qaatunazax̂. Eating beach greens with fish is good.
pituxax̂ rooster 
Pituxax̂ tunukux̂. The rooster is crowing.
plaastirax̂ plaster 

Atx̂uu plaastirax̂ daĝuutakux̂. His finger has a plaster on it.
plaatix̂ dress 
Plaatiin chuda. Put your dress on.
plitax̂ stove 
Plitax̂ tagadal aguun hagyaachxuzazax̂. When a stove is new it looks very clean. 
Plitax̂ atakux̂. The stove is on.
praadivax̂ string 
Praadivax̂ alanang liidaa maazalakax̂. The kind of string I need is not here.
praviizax̂ groceries 
Praviizax̂ alanang sukuq. I took the groceries I needed from the store.
priistinax̂ pier 
Priistinam angan sunax̂ akux̂. There is a boat against the pier.
prikaasikax̂ storekeeper 
Prikaasikax̂ laavkim ngaan awazax̂. The storekeeper works at the store.
prusaayil say goodbye; farewell 
Prusaayil qidakux̂. He/she is sad about saying goodbye.
pruutvinax̂ bread pan 
Pruutvinam nagan xliibax̂ agulgakux̂. Bread is being made in a bread pan.
pulaatxix̂ tent 
Pulaatxim qidungis ixluugamaxsikux̂. The ropes on the tent are too loose.
pulusxal rinse 
Chx̂uuĝit pulusxal taaman iguda. Rinse your clothes before taking them out.
Punidiilnikax̂ Monday 

Punidiilnikax̂ angalikux̂. Today is Monday.
puskax̂ cannon 
Puskax̂ kaluulakux̂. The cannon was shot.
pustaanikas briefs; shorts 
Asxinux̂ adaam pustaanikaa chx̂uuĝikux̂. The girl is washing her father's briefs.
pustiilkax̂ diaper 
Aniqdux̂ pustiilkaĝikux̂. The baby is wearing a diaper.
putuluukax̂ ceiling 
Putuluukax̂ hakaatxakux̂. The ceiling is high.
puugachix̂ button 
puugachil to button 
Chuuyuun atxax̂s puugachil taaman hitada. Button up your coat well before you go out.
Pyaatnichax̂ Friday 
Pyaatnichax̂ angaliilakux̂. It is now Friday.
Q
qa well! 
Qa, hingamaqadaax̂t! Well, would you stop it!
qaadax̂ dolly varden 
Qaadax̂ atxazakuq. I caught a dolly varden.
qaagux̂ scrap; rubbish 
Qaagum angunaa mitikux̂. She swept lots of rubbish.
qaagudgusix̂ garbage can 

Qaagudgusix̂ chx̂atichx̂ilakan hyutida. Empty the garbage can before it is too full. 
qaalax̂s to mock 
Agitaadaan qaalax̂takux̂. He made fun of his friend. 
qaalaĝnaax̂s mocking 
Qaalaĝnaax̂s tunux̂takux̂. He is talking mockingly.
qaalux̂ urine 
Qaalunux̂ agux̂takux̂. It smells like urine.
qaahngaliqdax̂ uvula 
Qaahngaliqdaa ukux̂taaqaan. Look at his uvula.
qaasis silverware 
Qaasis imis tayakuq. I bought you some silverware.
qaataa where 
Qaataa sapuuging? Where are my shoes?
qaatagaan beside 
Qaatagaan malgakux̂ alakax̂. There is nothing to do beside that.
qaatul wanting to eat 
qaatunal good to eat 
Qaatugalikuq. I am getting hungry. 
Qalgadax̂ qaatunakux̂. The food is delicious. 

qaatuuĝix sides 
qaatuuĝikix its sides 
Udam qaatuuĝikix qayakux̂. The sides of the bay are steep.
qachx̂ix̂ skin; bark; peel 
qachx̂iluxs sores; rough skin 
qachx̂izigal good, smooth skin 
hyaagam qachx̂ii tree bark 
apalsiinam qachx̂ii orange peel 
Qachx̂ii angalituĝulax. His skin is dark. 
Tayaĝux̂ qachx̂ilugikux̂. The man has sores. 
Asxinux̂ qachx̂idigakux̂. The girl has smooth skin.
qachx̂il to feed 
Aniqdux̂ qachx̂ikux̂. He/she is feeding the baby. 
Sabaakaan ngaan alqux̂ qachx̂it. What did you feed your dog?
qachx̂ul covering 
Ulam kangaa qachx̂ukus. They are covering the roof. 
qachimax̂ thigh 
Qachimang nanakux̂. My thigh hurts.

qachuqix̂ shark 
Qachuqim qachx̂ii sngaax liidazax̂. The shark's skin is like sandpaper.
qadgil penetrate 
Ayx̂aasix̂ hanĝis qadgikux̂. The boat went through or penetrated the waves. 
qadgis put through 
Quganax̂ ukuusxix̂ qadgil sadaadan aĝakux̂. The rock went through the window to the outside.
qadux̂ scab 
Kitang isii txin qadulĝikux̂. The cut on my foot has a scab on it.
qagaa hadaa east 
qagangudaĝan eastward 
qagaaĝix̂ eastern 
qagaanul go eastward 
Qagaa hadaa ax̂tal slaĝukux̂. The wind is blowing from the east. 
Sunax̂ qagangudaĝan ayx̂akux̂. The ship is going eastward. 
Qagaaĝix̂ ulam hadan huyakuq. I am going to the easternmost house. 
Qagaanul ax̂takux̂ haman. He went toward the east. 
qagaanus put lengthwise 
qagaatxal too much to the east 
Hyaagax̂ qagaanutida. Set the board lengthwise. 
Slaa qagaatxakux̂. The wind is too much to the east.
qagangaa front of boat 
Ayx̂aasim qagangaa qayakux̂. The front of the boat is high. 
qagal crack 

Hyaagax̂ qagalakux̂. The wood is crackling.
qagalĝix̂ nail; claw 
Chagan qagalĝii adukux̂. His nails are long.
qagamax̂ cartilage 
Qawam qagamaa tungaĝilakax̂. The sea lion's cartilage is soft.
qagidax̂ horned puffin 
Qagidax̂ uxchux̂ liidazax̂. The horned puffin looks like a tufted puffin.
qagmangix̂ emperor goose 
Qagmangix̂ inkamiiĝum qusan igax̂takux̂. A goose is flying over a cloud. 
Qagmangix̂ quganam kugan akux̂. The emporor goose is on the rock.
qagnax̂ bone; shell 
sam qagnaa the duck bone 
Saahmlam qagnaa quhmakux̂. The eggshell is white.
qaxatix̂ slingshot 
Qaxatix̂ sux̂tal sax̂ asx̂atikux̂. He killed a duck with his slingshot.
qaxchikdax̂ black 
qaxchikdatil getting dark 
Tayaĝum imlii qaxchikdakux̂. The man's hair is black. 
Qaxchikdatikux̂. It is getting dark (night). 
Asux̂ txin qaxchikdatikux̂. The pot is getting black (from smoke).
qax̂sal slip; slide 
Qax̂ chang ilaan qax̂sal itikux̂. The fish slipped from my hand and fell.

qaĝal to thank 
qaĝaasal to thank for 
Txin qaĝal hitil angalix̂. He thanked him and left. 
Qaĝaasakung. I thank you.
qaĝanaazax̂ fun; joy 
Qaĝanaazax̂ malgakux̂. There are lots of fun things to do.
qaĝanilakan to get angry 
Txin qaĝanilakan hitikux̂. He got angry and left.
qax̂ fish 
qanaax̂s to fish 
qanul smell of fish 
qatxaĝil to get fish 
qasil fishing 
Qax̂ tagadal aguun qaatunazax̂. When a fish is fresh, it is delicious. 
Qax̂ akux̂. It is a fish. 
Qanaax̂s slunaq. I went fishing this summer. 
Qanux̂ agux̂takux̂t. You smell like fish. 
Tayaĝux̂ qatxaĝikux̂. The man caught a fish. 
Qasil slukux̂. He went fishing this summer.
qakal to be dry 

qakatil to dry 
qakadgul to dry several 
qakayal to try to dry 
Chx̂uuĝim huzungis txidix qakatikus. All the clothes got dry. 
Hudas qakal aguun aqis taxsada. If the fish are dry, take them off and put them away. 
Qam hudaa txin qakatikux̂. The fish that was drying is dry. 
Hudas qakadgul slukux̂. She dried fish this summer. 
Chahmas chx̂uux̂s aqadaaming qakayal angaliq. I dried the dishes after I washed them. 
Lukamachit qakayakux̂. He is drying his gloves.
qakiidax̂ silver salmon 
Qakiidax̂ haanux̂ liidazax̂. A silver salmon looks like a red salmon.
qaklaxs dry; brittle 
xliibam qaklagii dry hard bread 
taganim qaklagingis hail 
Xliibax̂ qaklagikux̂. The bread is hard and dry. 
qakung in there 
qakuuĝal to reach in there 
qakuunul to go in there 
qakuutxal deep (ie: bag) 
Qakuligan akux̂. He is in there. 
Ayx̂aasix̂ udam qalan qakuuĝakux̂. The boat reached the inside of the bay. 
Qakuunul qakung unguchida. Go in there and sit down. 

Udax̂ qakuutxakux̂. The bay is deep.
qal to eat; bite 
qalgadax̂ food 
qazul good eater 
Chugix̂talakan qalgadaan qal inatida. Be quiet and finish your food. 
qaqamiiĝul hunting (for food) 
qaqatul heavy eater 
Tayaĝux̂ qaqamiiĝukux̂. The man is hunting (for food). 
Qagatul hagumakux̂. He is usually a heavy eater. 
Hlax̂ qax̂ qal qilax̂six̂. The boy ate the fish this morning. 
Qas qal qilax̂sis. The fish were biting this morning. 
Qalgadax̂ imis agulgal aguun alĝulakan qada. If they give you food, don't hesitate to eat. 
Agaludigakux̂ mal qazuzax̂. He is a good eater because he has good teeth. 
qala bottom (of boat) 
qalax̂tal have as bottom, purport 
Buchuunikax̂ qalaan hnukux̂. The barrel's contents is almost gone (reaches its bottom). 
Qalax̂tanaa haqatalakaĝing. I don't know what kind of bottom the boat has.
qalaĝil being numerous 
Anĝaĝinas qalaĝikus. There are lots of people.
qaluxs pass across 
Chiĝanax̂ qalugikuq. I am going across the river.
qalus hot springs 

Qalus ilan ting taangalĝitakuq. I am soaking in the hot springs.
qaluuĝix̂ inner; interior 
qamagix̂ stingray (family Dasyatidae) 
Qamagix̂ chagix̂ hizax liidazax̂. The stingray looks a lot like a halibut.
qamchiing eight 
qamchiing sisax̂ eight hundred 
qamchiingidim eight times 
qamchiingidim hatix̂ eighty 
qamchiing chaasxis eight cups 
Qamchiingidim hatix̂ anĝaĝinas wang akus. There are eighty people living here.
qamdal be deep 
qamdaatii its depth 
qamdaatal be as deep as 
Alaĝux̂ qamdakux̂. The ocean is deep. 
Qamdaatii sanalakax̂. It is not deep enough. 
Fuutax̂ qamdaatakux̂. It is a foot deep.
qamix eyebrows 
Anĝaĝinam huzuu qamiĝikux̂. All people have eyebrows.
qamtix̂ shoulder blade 
Qamtiim sitxan nanaĝikux̂. He has pain underneath his shoulder blade.
qahmax̂ crouch; stride 

qahmax̂tal straddling 
Kanaagum qusan qahmada. Stride across the stream.
qahmigix̂ door 
Qahmigix̂ chachil hachitida. Close the door and lock it. 
Qahmigix̂ hachix̂takux̂. The door is locked.
qanan which 
qanang where 
qanaax from where 
Qanaaĝal? Where is he now? 
qanahligan where 
qanaanul to go where 
qanayaam when 
Qanahligan sunax̂ al? Where is the ship? 
Qanaanuumis? Where are you going? 
Qanayaam ukux̂taqaan? When did you see it?
qanasix̂ slit in seal hide (for holding) 
Ulum daĝan qanasix̂ akux̂. There is a holder in the meat.
qan'gix̂ winter 
qan'gaax in the winter 
qanaxs doing in winter 
qanikinga spring
Qan'gix̂ haqakux̂. Winter is coming. 

Qan'gaax qinganax̂ malgazax̂. It is cold in the winter. 
Mayaax̂s qanagnaq. I trapped during the winter. 
Qanikinga haqakux̂. Spring is coming. 
qaniigix̂ snow 
qaniixtul lots of snow 
qaniigim ayx̂aasii sno-go 
qaniigim sapuugii snow shoes 
Qaniigix̂ Apriilam agalaan maazaqadazax̂. The snow melts after April. 
Ulas quchxingis qaniixtukus. There is lots of snow between the houses. 
Wayaam qaniigim ayx̂aasii alamasukuq. I probably need a snow machine now. 
Qaniigim sapuugii udaadan suĝamaakakux̂. We should use snow shoes around here too.
qankus three 
qankul get three 
qankudim three times 
qankudim hatix̂ thirty 
Qankus uuquchiingis qakus. The three foxes are eating. 
Isuĝix̂ qankul saĝanaq. I got three seals yesterday. 
Qankudim hatix̂ slux̂takux̂. She is thirty years old.
qangal be cooked; ripen 

qangas to burn 
Ulux̂ qangakux̂. The meat is cooked. 
Aĝadgim qangatxaa udiĝizax̂. Sunburn is very painful.
qanglaaĝix̂ raven 
Qanglaaĝix̂ mikakux̂. The raven is playing. 
qanglagil curious 
qanglaxtal to be curious about 
Qanglagnax̂ asx̂adax̂. Curiosity kills. 
Haman qanglaxtakux̂. He is curious about it.
qanglix̂ shoulder 
qanglal pack on shoulder 
Tayaĝux̂ qangliim kugan hyaagax̂ haĝux̂takux̂. The man is packing wood on his shoulder 
Hyaagax̂ qanglax̂tal aygagasakux̂. He is packing wood on his shoulder.
qangul enter 
qangutil bring in 
qanguusal go in with; bring in 
Hmiichix̂ qangutida. Bring in the ball. 
Iklas qanguusada. Bring in the wood.
qahngux̂ seaweed 
Chaliiluĝim kadan qahngus hanikakus. There is seaweed floating in front of the fishing place.
qaqaĝix̂ pacific loon 
Qaqaĝix̂ tununaa tutalgaqax̂. The cry of the loon was heard.
qasal to surface 

qasaxtal to stay above water for some time 
qasamixs to bob up and down from the water 
qasanisal to wait for game (ie: seal coming up from the water) 
Isux̂ qasakux̂. The seal surfaced from the water. 
Tayaĝux̂ isuĝix̂ qasanisakux̂. The man is waiting for a seal to come up.
qasxal to laugh 
Kaagnanaaĝil aqadaam qasxal txin asx̂anix̂takux̂. She was teasing and laughed very hard. 
qasluxs to argue 
Ayagas qaslugikus. The women are arguing.
qasmax̂ scale of fish 
Qam qasmangis aqitida. Take the scales off of the fish.
qatxayax̂ winter wren 
Qatxayax̂ sakucham chuqudaa ax̂. A wren is a small bird.
qatxuuyax̂ shirt 
Qatxuyaan aqitida. Take your shirt off.
qatix̂ crack 
Hyaagax̂ qatitukux̂. The wood has big cracks.
qawax̂ sea lion 
qawaadax̂ young sea lion 

Qawax̂ alaĝum ilagaan qasakux̂. The sea lion surfaces (from the sea). 
Qawaadax̂ qalgaa qaatunakux̂. A young sea lion is good eating.
Qawalangix̂ Eastern Aleut 
Umnagim anĝaĝinangis qawalangis hiilax̂tazas. The people of Umnak are called Qawalangis.
qayal high 
qayalakan low 
qayax̂ hill 
qan'gim qayaa leap year 
qayaatii height 
qayaatal to be as high as 
qayalax̂silakan very high 
Qayax̂ qayakux̂ hangaatunalakax̂. The hill is high and hard to climb. 
Qayax̂ hangalagaax̂t imis hix̂taangan ax̂takuq. I told you not to climb the hill. 
Qan'gim qayaa malgakux̂. It is leap year. 
Qayaatii atxitida. Measure its height. 
Tayaĝux̂ qayaatakux̂. He is as tall as the man. 
Hingan ulax̂ qayalax̂silakan. That building is very high.
qayux̂ retrieving line 
Qayux̂ sux̂tal isux̂ qayuda. Retrieve the seal with the retrieving line.
qichx̂il hang up for drying 
qichx̂ital keep hung up 
chx̂uuĝis qichx̂itada keep the clothes hanging 
Achunax̂ malgakux̂ chx̂uuĝis qichx̂il angaliq. It was windy when I hung up the clothes. 

qichiĝil sharp 
qichiĝlakan not sharp; dull 
Ukinang qichiĝilakax̂. My knife is dull.
qichil go around 
qichilix̂tal to feel dizzy 
qichitix̂ money 
Agitaadaan agiital qichikux̂. He is going around with his friend. 
Aniqdus txidix agiital qichikus. The children are going around with each other. 
Qichilix̂tax̂ tutakuq. I feel dizzy. 
Qichitix̂ suĝal tayalgazax̂. Money is used for buying.
qidaayus gray hair 
Imlii txin qidaayutikux̂. His hair is getting gray.
qidal to cry 
Malaaniyaa alqus qidaasal hamamax̂? What is Molly crying about? 
Braatang hikis qidakuq. I am crying because I lost my brother. 
qidux̂ rope 
Qidux̂ alaĝum chidaĝan akux̂ ukul saĝanaq. I found a rope by the beach yesterday. 
Qidux̂ adukux̂. The rope is long.

qigaaĝix̂ easterly 
qigaaĝix̂ angtaa the easterly side 
qigangaa east side 
Qigaaĝix̂ hatas hulal ax̂takux̂. The wind has switched to the east overnight. 
Tanam qigangaa slaĝukux̂. The eastern side of the island is stormy.
qigamlul to cut hair 
qiklul to cut hair 
Kamgiin qikluchx̂ida. Get your hair cut.
qigdal to hook 
Qigdakung. I hooked it.
qiglagidal crackle; make static 
Chaayas qiglagidakus. The phonograph is making static.
qiglal snagging the bottom 
qiglax̂tal stuck on the bottom 
Imgaĝing qiglax̂takux̂. My line is snagged on the bottom.
qiglul knot; twist; knit 
Chuulkix̂ qiglukux̂. She is knitting the sock.
qignax̂ fire; match 
Qignax̂ chix̂tal aguun atiituzaĝulax. A match won't light when it's wet. 
Qignax̂ atakux̂. The match is lit.
qignul to play with a child 
Aniqdux̂ qignux̂takux̂. He/she is playing with the child.
qigul to gather; collect; pick 
Aangsus qigukux̂. He/she is gathering berries. 
Chuxchas suĝanax̂taaĝan aqadix qigukus. Eskimos gather and put away their carving material.

qigux̂ common loon 
qiguĝix̂ common loon 
Qigux̂ igax̂takux̂. The common loon is flying.
qixyax̂ shelf 
Qixyax̂ hakaatxakux̂. The shelf is high.
qiĝunal hard to get 
qiĝunalakan easy to get 
Ukunaax̂sxaa qiĝunakux̂. It is very difficult to find.
qiigax̂ grass 
qiigam isx̂atii grass basket 
Qiigax̂ adul aygagiitunaĝulax agux̂takux̂. The grass is long and makes walking hard. 
Qiigam isx̂atii agulgaa ayqinalakax̂. Making a basket is not hard.
qiix̂chiidax̂ green-winged teal 
Qiix̂chiidax̂ chuqudakux̂. The green-winged teal is small.
qiihliqdax̂ navel 
Qiihliqdang kichignakux̂. My navel is itchy.
qiimayaaxs scratch 
Ting qiimayaagikuq. I am scratching myself.
qiihminul smell of rut and perspiration 
Itx̂aygis qiihminukus. The reindeer are rutting.

qikun the one in there 
qikung in there 
Qikung unguchikux̂. She is sitting in there.
qilax̂ morning 
qilam early morning 
qilaax̂ early 
qilagan tomorrow; yesterday 
qilax̂sil do in the morning 
Qilam qilaax̂ hax̂tikux̂. He gets up early in the morning. 
Qilagan haqaaĝan saĝanax̂. He will come tomorrow. 
Qilagan haqal saĝanax̂. He came yesterday. 
Ayuxtal qilax̂six̂. He was out this morning.
qilĝix̂ navel cord 
Aniqdum gilĝii isilgakux̂. The baby's navel cord was cut.
qilĝis ribs of a boat 
Ayx̂aasim qilĝingis agukus. We are making ribs for the boat.
qiliĝis brain 
Kamgim qiliĝingis kamgim ilan akus. The brains are in the head. 
qilul imitate 
Agitaadaan qilukux̂. He is imitating his friend.
qihluxs to bark (dog) 
Sabaakax̂ gihlugikux̂. The dog is barking. 

Sabaakax̂ qihlugil aguun sasulinazax̂. When the dog barks it's disturbing.
qimgitix̂ crab 
Qimgitix̂ alax kigusim kayutukix matazax̂. A crab has two strong pinchers. 
Qimgitix̂ atuung kitax̂tazax̂. The crab has six legs. 
qihmul twisted 
Imyaĝix̂ qihmukux̂. The fish-line is twisted.
qinganax̂ cold 
Txin qinganatikux̂. It is getting cold.
qingdix̂ spit; mucus 
alaĝum qingdii jellyfish 
qingdil to spit 
Aamgix̂ qingdiisal? Did he spit out blood? 
Alaĝum qingdingis alaĝum achidan alanazaĝulas. There are usually lots of jellyfish by the beach.
qingul to kiss 
Hlax̂, asxinux̂ qingul ii? Did the boy kiss the girl?
qiqix̂ fish slime; fluid of the eye; ear wax 
Qam qiqii angyunakux̂. Fish slime is slippery.
qiqutal to keep in isolation 
Ulam ilan qiqutalgakux̂. She is kept isolated in the house.
qis to cramp 
qidusal to jam 
qital bent 

qitmixs to cramp 
Igachining qitnaaĝikus. My muscles are trying to cramp. 
Qahmigim ilan chaan qidusakux̂. He jammed his finger in the door. 
Dux̂tax̂ qitakux̂. The hook is bent. 
Igachining qitmigikus. My muscles are cramping.
qisadgul to tie several 
qisax̂tax̂ one is tied 
qisas to tie 
Yaasikas qisadguda. Tie up the boxes. 
Iklax̂ qisax̂takux̂. The log is tied. 
Alax niivudix qisatikux̂. He ties two nets together. 
Ayx̂aasix̂ qisatida. Tie the boat. 
Qisagunix̂ March 
Qisagunim tugidaganaa slagutuzax̂. March is windy.
qisxil to steer, drive (as with a motor) 
qisngil to drive 
qisxusix̂ rudder 
Duurax̂ qisxil ayx̂akux̂. He is steering the boat. 
Qaniigim ayx̂aasii qisngil ayx̂aasakux̂. He is out driving a snow machine. 
Laanchim qisxusii six̂takux̂. The rudder on the dory is broken.
qisix̂ palm of hand 
Qisiim qalan anaĝix̂ sux̂takux̂. He/she is holding something in his/her palm.

qizangix̂ ancient murrelet 
Qizangix̂ sakucham chuqudaa ax̂. An ancient murrelet is a small duck.
quchxingis space in between 
quchigingis space in between 
Tayaĝux quchxingin unguchikux̂. He is sitting in between two men.
quchxital to mix in 
Aliguutax̂ amilaayux̂ quchxitakux̂. Aleut is spoken mixed with the English language.
qudga top side 
Tanam qudga aygagikux̂. He is walking on the top side.
qudgaaĝix̂ back fin 
Qam qudgaaĝingin aqitikux̂. She is cutting the fins off the fish.
qugaangix̂ American common scoter duck 
Qugaangix̂ qaxchikdakux̂. The American common scoter is black.
qugax̂ devil; assistant spirit 
qugam chachx̂uu devil's club 
qugam tutusii mushroom 
qugaaĝix̂ shaman 
Qugax̂ akux̂. It is a devil. 
Qugam tutusingis agiitingis qalgazaĝulax. We eat mushrooms but some are not edible. 
quganax̂ rock 
quuganaalĝis pebbles 

Quganam agiitingis ignatuzas. Some rocks are heavy. 
Quuganaalĝis hunam nagan imdaalakus. The pebbles are used for filling the hole.
qugutux̂ the upper shaft of thigh bone of seal of sea lion 
Qugutux̂ mikaasakux̂. He is playing with the bone.
quguulinal sour 
Uĝux̂ quguulinakux̂. The juice is sour.
quxsux̂ wedge 
quxsul to chop 
Iklax̂ quxsukux̂. He is chopping wood. 
Ivaan ngus quxsul ax̂taaĝutakux̂. John is chopping wood for me.
qukinĝix̂ swan 
Qukinĝix̂ hanim ilan akux̂. There is a swan in the lake. 
Qukinĝix̂ salĝum quhmaa ax̂. A swan is a big white bird. 
qulaan for the sake of 
qulangiin for the sake of 
Qulaan ting ahmayaax̂takuu. He asked me about him. 
Haagalagaaĝan qulagaan huzugaan qanaaĝzas. In order not to be hungry, we go fishing all the time.
qulax̂ collarbone 
qam qulaa fish's collarbone 
Hlax̂ qulaan natikux̂. The boy's collarbone is hurt. 
qulax̂tal to choke on something 
Qagnax̂ qulax̂taasakux̂. He is choking on the bone.

qulangil to defend 
Hlaan qulangikux̂. He is defending his son.
qulx̂udax̂ bald head 
Qulx̂udaa tasx̂idakux̂. His bald head is shiny. 
quhmax̂ white 
quhmas to become white 
quuhmliixs gray 
Aliĝim imlii quhmakux̂. The old man's hair is white. 
Imlii txin quhmatikux̂. His hair is getting white. 
Imliin txin quuhmliixtikux̂. Your hair is getting gray.
qungas make ready; prepare 
Qalgadas qungas agadaam ayugnax̂. He prepared some food and went out to sea.
qungix̂ humpback 
qungaayux̂ humpback salmon; male pink salmon 
Sabaakax̂ qungiĝikux̂. The dog has a humpback. 
Qungaayux̂ ixtxikux. She is eating fish.
qungtuxs to snore 
Qungtuxs saĝakux̂. He is snoring in his sleep.
quqdax̂ dirt 
Quqdatukux̂. It is dirty.
qusaa space above it 
qusan above 

qusamudaĝan upward 
Plitam qusan inkakux̂. It is hanging above the stove.
qutaxs blow up from the ground 
Qutaxsxal hangaalakux̂. It is being blown upward.
quugaqaadal moldy 
Taxsax̂taqang txin quugaqaadatil ax̂takux̂. The thing I had stored got moldy.
quyx̂il to cough 
quyx̂iluxs to have a chest cold 
Tayaĝux̂ quyx̂ikux̂. The man is coughing. 
Quyx̂iluxs iĝamanaĝulax tutakux̂. He doesn't feel good because he has a very bad chest cold. 
quyul to go to bed 
quyuĝil to lie down 
quyux̂tal to lie down 
Laampax̂ uxil taaman txin quyuda. Turn out the lamp then go to bed. 
Quyuĝil anĝikux̂. He is resting on his back. 
Qaqadaam txin quyux̂tal angalix̂. He laid down after he ate. 
qyal to be tight 
qyas to tighten 
qyatil to tighten 

Misuukax̂ taxul qyatikux̂. She tied the sack tightly.
qyunal to be slippery 
Akaluĝim kdaa qyunakux̂. The ice on the road is slippery.
raamax̂ frame 
Ukuusxim raamaa iĝduxtakux̂. The window frame is rotten.
rayfilax̂ rifle 
Rayfilax̂ matakung akux̂ chiikdangis atxaĝilakax̂. I have a rifle but it is off target. 
rubaaxax̂ tee shirt 
Tayaĝus rubaaxas chux̂tazas. The men wear tee shirts.
rubasuunkax̂ shirt 
Rubusuunkaan chuda. Put on your shirt.
rugas antlers 
Itxaygix̂ rugas matazax̂. Reindeer have antlers.
ruulix̂ rudder 
Ruulim umnaa isakux̂. The rope on the rudder broke.
saaxarax̂ sugar 
saaxalnichax̂ sugar bowl 

Saaxalnicham nagan saaxarax̂ aĝada. Put some sugar in the sugar bowl. 
Saaxarax̂ qalgadam idigaa ax̂. Sugar is a food that is sweet. 
Saaxarax̂ idigakux̂. The sugar is sweet.
saakux̂ king eider 
Saakux̂ kalul saĝanaq. I shot a king eider yesterday.
saakunal skinny 
Txin saakunatikux̂. He became skinny.
saakuutal to lie upside down 
Ayx̂aasix̂ saakuutakux̂. The boat is lying upside down.
saalax̂ lard 
Saalax̂ suĝal unalgazax̂. Lard is used for cooking.
saalux̂ dry breeze weather without rain 
Saalutikux̂. It stopped raining.
saahmix̂ iron; steel 
Saahmim ilagaan ugraadix̂ agukux̂. He is making a gate out of iron.
saahmlax̂ egg 
saahmlaĝil to lay eggs 
Kuuricham anaa saahmlax̂ aguzax̂. A mother hen lays eggs. 
Kuurichax̂ saahmlaĝikux̂. The hen layed eggs.
saaqudax̂ wild parsnip 
Saaqudax̂ qaatunakux̂. The wild parsnip is good eating.
saaqudgix̂ summer 

Saaqudgim aslaan akinax̂ malgazakux̂. In the summertime it is warm.
saaqudikinga fall 
Saaqudgim agaluĝii, saaqudikinga ax̂. Right after summer it is fall.
saazax̂ soot 
Trubax̂ saazax̂ itakux̂. The chimney has soot in it. 
sabaakax̂ dog 
sabaakam chiidaa puppy 
sabaakam naartaa dog sled 
Sabaakax̂ qakux̂. The dog is eating. 
Sabaakam chiidaa chamlux̂ chiĝnikux̂. The puppy wet the floor. 
Chuxchas sabaakam naartangis sux̂tazas. Eskimos use dog sleds.
sadaa hadaa outside 
tanam sadaa axs passing the island seaside 
sadim hadaa out at sea 
sadaax from outside 
sadaaĝal to go out 
sadaĝil to be out at sea or outside 
sadmudaĝan to move out 
saduuĝix̂ the outer 
tanĝim saduuĝii outside of islet 
Ulam sadan akux̂. It is out in front of the house. 
Sadaaĝal hamaya alquuq? What shall I go out for? 

Isux̂ waan nagan agnaa ukux̂tanaax̂s sadaĝikuq. I was outside waiting for the seal to swim through this bay. 
Sadmudaĝan hitxitida. Move it outside. 
Saduuĝix̂ tanĝix̂ angunakux̂. The outer island is big.
sadaxs to be fat 
isuĝim sadagii the fat seal 
sadagayal to make fat 
Txin sadaxtikux̂. He becomes fat.
sadignax̂ young seal 
Sadignam tugidaa August 
Sadignax̂ qaatunakux̂. The young seal is good eating.
sagimaĝix̂ face 
Bumaagim kugan sagimaĝix̂ aguda. Draw a face on a paper. 
sagimaaglux̂ mask 
Kamgadax̂ sagimaaqlux̂ kuum chudaĝulax. Christians should not put on masks.
sagis creases on the hand; palm lines 
Chamis sagingis ukux̂takuq. I see the creases on your hand.
saxtal lazy 
saxtal saĝakux̂ sleeping lazily 
saxtalakan industrious

saĝal sleep 
saĝaasis bedding 
saĝaatul to be sleepy 
saĝaayul to take a nap 
saĝaayuusix̂ lullaby song 
saĝalital to be sleepwalking 
saĝanil to put to sleep 
saĝatul to sleep late 
saĝayal try to make sleep 
Hlax̂ chamlum kugan saĝal hulaa-ax̂takux̂. A boy slept on the floor all night. 
Sabaakax̂ saĝakux̂. The dog is sleeping. 
Saĝaasis sul hamaanuda. Take your bedding and go there. 
Saĝaatul saĝakux̂. He is sleeping because he is sleepy. 
Qam agalaa saĝaayul angaliq. I took a nap this afternoon. 
Saĝalital ulaam nagan aygagikux̂. He is sleep-walking in his house. 
Aniqduun saĝanil. She puts her baby to sleep. 
Txin saĝanil. He falls asleep. 
Saĝatul saĝakuq. I slept late. 
Aniqdux̂ kachaasal saĝayal. She tried rocking the baby to sleep. 
sax̂ duck; bird 
sam isxaa bird nest 

Sax̂ unanang chugaduukalakax̂. The duck I am cooking isn't going to be enough. 
Sax̂ igax̂takux̂. The duck is flying. 
Sax̂ hanim ilan uchigikux̂. A duck is swimming in the lake. 
Sam isxaa, ataqan saahmlax̂ itakux̂. A bird nest has one egg in it. 
sakan that one out there; that one down there 
sakang out there; down there 
sakaax from out there; from down there 
sakaaĝas to take down; put out to sea 
sakaaĝal to have reached bottom 
sakaaĝatal put down temporarily; calm down; behave 
txin sakaaĝatalakax̂ upset; not relaxed 
sakaatxal be way out there; be way down there 
sakangudaĝan downwards; out at sea 
Ayx̂aasix̂ sakaaĝatikux̂. He puts the boat out to sea. 
Txin sakaaĝatikux̂. He sits down to rest. 
Prisidiintax̂ sakaaĝasxakux̂. The President was elected or seated. 
Sakaaĝal txin unguchitikux̂. Having reached the bottom, he sat down. 
Aniqduun igiim sakaaĝataasalakax̂. She is worried about her child. 
Sunax̂ sakaatxakux̂. The ship is way out there. 
Sakangudaĝan kimikux̂. He is going down the hill.
sakiigix̂ rib 
Itx̂aygim sakiigingis suupaatuzaq. I like reindeer rib soup.
sakitax̂ common murre 

Sakitax̂ chlaĝikux̂. The murre dove under.
salamaalix̂ rain pants 
Salamaaliin chuda. Put your rain pants on.
saludigal give good coverage i.e. stalking or hunting geese or sea mammals 
Qayax̂ saludigakux̂ mal itx̂aygix̂ hnul kalunaq. I was fortunate enough for good coverage because I got to shoot a reindeer.
samgal to fall faceward 
Sagimaĝlim kugan samgakux̂. He fell on his face.
sams to count 
samusix̂ number 
Samikux̂. He is counting. 
Nuumiras samikux̂. He is counting the numbers. 
sahmil to pull aside; jerk 
sahmiisal jerked 
Sahmikung. I pushed it.
sahmikaadax̂ yarrow (plant) 
Sahmikaadax̂ hithnisax̂ ax̂. Yarrow is a plant.
sanal to be sufficient 
sanaqaĝikux̂ just enough 
Sanakuun sanal xaadagnaaĝinax̂. He ran as fast as he could. 

Sanachx̂ikung. I let it be sufficient. 
Sanatayugaaĝikuq. I had enough for awhile.
sanĝuĝ inflated bladder 
Sanĝum nagan hudas taxsakuq. I am storing dried meat in the inflated bladder.
sahnganal to be respectable; be honorable 
Ukuĝaa sahnganakux̂. He looks respectable.
sapuugis shoes 
Sapuugit chuda. Put your shoes on.
saraayax̂ warehouse 
Saraayam ilan ikias aĝada. Put the wood in the warehouse.
sasas annual circles of a tree 
Iklam sasangis samikuq. I am counting the annual circles on the log. 
sasxaĝux̂ whole; intact 
Xliibam sasxaĝuu qakux̂. He ate a whole loaf of bread.
sasulil be annoyed 
sasulinal bothersome 
sasulitil to bother 
Sasulix̂taqang. I found him bothersome.
satxax̂ gillnet 
Satxax̂ alaĝum ilan itakux̂. The gillnet is set out in the sea.
saygix̂ gun or firearm 
Sayging kayagnakux̂. My rifle is heavy.
saykax̂ tin tub; washtub 

Wan saykax̂ chuqudakux̂. This tub is small. 
sayul pull 
Ayx̂aasiin sayuda. Pull your boat. 
Hlakuchax̂ mikaasiin sayul ixchikux̂. The boy is pulling his toy home.
sayuqaĝil to win 
Mikam ilan mikal akux̂ sayuqaĝil angalix̂. He won by playing in a game.
sdax̂ star 
Sdas higayax̂ malgal aguun angalidigazas. The stars are bright when it is freezing. 
Sdax̂ ukux̂takuq. I see a star.
sxiixtul to be thick (a flat object) 
Aluĝis sxiixtukus. The book is thick.
sx̂iigix̂ Japanese perch 
Sx̂iigix̂ uluudakux̂. The pogie is red. 
sx̂iigim umĝuulungis pogie roe 
Sx̂iigim umĝuulungis qaatunazas. The pogie roe is good eating.
sichiing nine 
sichiingidim nine times 
sichiingidim hatix̂ ninety 
sichiing ulas nine houses 
Sichiing ulas ukux̂takuq. I see nine houses.
siching four 
sichidim four times 
sichidim hatix̂ forty 

siching hyaagas four logs 
Siching hyaagas hanikakus. The four logs are floating in the water.
sigaarkis cigars 
Sigaarkis hwaĝitukus. The cigars are smokey.
sigax̂ fathom; present; gift 
Sigax̂ aduutakux̂. It is six feet long.
sigux̂ wrinkle 
Txin alix̂til sigutux̂ txin hitikux̂. He is getting old and wrinkled.
sixs to go up from shore 
sigusal to bring up 
Sigusakung. I brought it up.
sixsal broken in two 
sixsil to break in two 
sixsix̂ wishbone 
Ayx̂aasim ux̂asii sixsikuq. I broke the oar in half. 
Hlax̂ kanfiixtam angakix sixsikux̂. The boy broke the candy in half.
siĝlix̂ leaf; petal 
Tamaakax̂ siĝlix̂ akux̂ inuĝazax̂. Tobacco is a leaf but we chew it. 
Taaĝan'gim siĝlingis angunakus. The leaves on the wild parsnip are big. 

six̂alagil to splash around; struggle 
Qax̂ taangam ilan six̂alagikux̂. The fish is splashing around in the water.
six̂il to break; smash 
six̂s break to pieces 
six̂tikux̂ it breaks 
Six̂takux̂. It is broken. 
Kiin ukuusxix̂ six̂il ax̂taaĝutakux̂? Who broke the window once again? 
Stiklax̂ six̂ikux̂. He broke the glass.
siihmlux̂ pigeon gillemot 
Siihmlus quganas sitxan saahmlaĝizas. Pigeon gillemots have their eggs under rocks.
siintax̂ cent 
Kanfiixtax̂ siintax̂ akix̂takux̂. The candy cost a cent.
siirtax̂ yarn 
Siirtax̂ sux̂tal qiglunang chugalakax̂. The yarn I am using for knitting isn't enough. 
siisx̂ix̂ nosebleed 
Hlax̂ siisx̂ikux̂. The boy has a nosebleed.
siitxix̂ neck scarf; handkerchief 
Ayagam siitxii ukukux̂. He found a woman's scarf.
siknul decay (fish) 

siknux̂ decaying fish 
Txin siknutikux̂. It starts decaying.
silan toward 
Silan gikung. I'm drawn toward it. 
Kalul aaĝakung silahlii axchx̂il angaling. I shot at it but only hit under it.
sildix̂ herring 
Sildix̂ qasmatuzax̂. The herring has big scales. 
simsix̂ chest; ocean sponge 
Simsing sitxangis hixtilgakux̂. I have heartburn.
sihmil spank 
sihmiisix̂ whip 
Hlax̂ sihmikuq. I spanked the boy.
sihmitil to get startled (seal or sea lion) 
Isux̂ ting ukul sihmitikux̂. The seal got startled when he saw me.
siniga inside of something 
Siniging iĝamanalakaĝix. My insides are no good. 
Siniking agiqalikux̂. I am beginning to feel high.
Sintaabrax̂ September 
Sintaabrax̂ way malgakux̂. It is now September.
sinul to be beachcombing; to find 
Alaĝum achidan sinukuq. I am beach combing.
singkix̂ sink 
Singkix̂ chahmas chx̂aasakux̂. The sink is full of dishes.

singlal comb 
singlaasix̂ a comb 
Singlaasix̂ matax̂t? Do you have a comb?
singlil to close an eye 
Dang singlikuq. I closed my eye. 
singlimixs to be winking 
Dalĝun ngus singlimixs hingamax̂t? Are you winking your big eye at me? 
Siridax̂ Wednesday 
Siridax̂ nidilim utma ax. Wednesday is the middle of the week.
sirivrax̂ silver 
Uuquchiingim sirivraa qayax̂ hangakux̂. A silver fox is climbing the hill.
sisax̂ hundred 
sisax̂ anĝaĝinas one hundred people
sisal to get lost; stray 
Ayangim ilan sisakuq. I got lost in the fog.
sisxix̂ pass (over land) 
Sisxix̂ axs hamaanukux̂. He passed over land to the other side.
sismil save; support 
Braatang ting sisminax̂. My brother saved me.
sistraa his or her sister 
Mariiyam sistraa aalux̂takux̂. Mary's sister is smiling. 

sisuxs to cross over 
Tangix̂ sisugikuq. I crossed over to the other side of the islet.
sitxil to discharge excrements 
sitxis excrements 
Sabaakas sitxikus. The dog is excreting.
sitxa space underneath 
sitxim hadaa the downside 
sitxuuĝix̂ downside in relation to height 
sitxuunul to go downward 
sitxuutxal way below 
Stuuluĝim sitxa axs. Go underneath the table. 
Stuuluĝim sitxan unguchikux̂. She is sitting under the table. 
Ulam sitxuuĝii iĝduxtakux̂. The bottom part of the house is rotting. 
Sitxuunulikug sakaaĝanaq. I descended until I reached bottom. 
Sitxuutxan akux̂t. You are too far below.
sitx̂isil to be stingy 
Sabaakax̂ qalgadaan sitx̂isiisakux̂. The dog is stingy with its food.
sitil sweat 
sis sweat 
Qachx̂iin sitikux̂. Your skin is sweating.
sitil break from cut 
Qanasii sitikux̂. The handle has broken.

sitmil to cut; erode 
Chiĝanax̂ kingtix̂ sitmitil ax̂takux̂. The river apparently cut the bank.
skaapax̂ cupboard 
Skaapax̂ chahmas itakux̂. The cupboard contains dishes. 
skaarfax̂ neck scarf 
Hlang ngaan skaarfax̂ qiglukuq. I am knitting a scarf for my son.
skiifax̂ skiff 
Skiifax̂ haqakux̂. There is a skiff coming.
skuulnikax̂ student 
Skuulnikas waaĝakus. The students came back.
skuunax̂ schooner 
Sunam masinasiĝulaa skuunax̂ hiilax̂talgazax̂. The ship without a motor is called a schooner.
skuuvuruudax̂ frying pan 
Maarya skuuvuruudax̂ mulil hagyayada. Mary scours the frying pay and cleans it.
slaaĝal to go outside 
Slaaĝax̂taqaliingan aĝikuq. I am going out now. (Goodbye)
slaapax̂ cap 
Slaapax̂ kamgim kugan chuĝazax̂. The cap is worn over the head.
slaxs wide; broad; to make wider 
slagidgul to make several things wider 

slagaatii its width 
slagaatal to be as wide as 
Slaxtikung. I made it wide. 
Slagikux̂. It is wide.
slax̂ wind; weather 
slal to blow 
slas points of compass 
slachxizax̂ nice weather 
slaagamagis main points of compass 
sladulal to get caught in a storm 
slaĝul windy 
slaĝutikux̂ to become windy 
slaĝutul stormy 
slalimaĝil predicting weather 
tanam slaqatuu stormy island 
Slaĝutikux̂. It is getting stormy. 
Ayuxtakuq ting sladulanax̂. When I went out in a boat I got caught in a storm. 
slil to empty 
Taangax̂ buchuunikam nagan slikuq. I empty some water in the barrel.
slugan in the sphere of 
slugan sakaaĝal to approach from topside 
Tanasxan slugan saĝaamis ii? Are you going to sleep at the camp?

slux̂ summer; year; world 
slul pass the summer; do in the year 
sluuluĝix̂ summer place 
Qankus slux̂takux̂. He is three years old. 
Qan'gix̂ ama saaqudgix̂ slus as. Winter and summer are two of the seasons.
slukax̂ glaucous winged gull 
slukam aahmaaĝii anemone (flower) 
Slukax̂ quhmakux̂. The seagull is white.
sluuvkax̂ whale boat 
Sunam sluuvkaa chalakux̂. The whale boat came ashore.
smiiĝix̂ wandering tattler (bird) 
Smiiĝix̂ sakucham sadagii ax̂. A wandering tattler is fat.
sngaagix̂ skin of shark; sandpaper 
Hyaagax̂ sngaaxsxakux̂. The wood is being sanded.
sngaĝiduxsil ticklish; to tickle 
Ayagax̂ ting sngaaĝiduxsikux̂. The woman is tickling me.
sngaxs dream 
sngagil dream 
Sngagil ting iĝataangan ax̂takuq. I was afraid in my dream.
sngalux̂s men's social gathering 
Sngalux̂s sunam haqanaa hachiĝikuq. I am waiting for the ship to come.
snganaadax̂ holy 

Kamgam ulaa snganaadakux̂. The Church is holy. 
spaalinax̂ bedroom 
Spaalinam hadan saĝalgazax̂. We sleep in the bedroom.
staampax̂ stamp 
Alux̂ agul staampax̂ kugan aĝida. Write a letter and put a stamp on it.
staaral to be old (things) 
Masinas staaratikus. The motor is getting old.
staarastax̂ church elder 
Staarastax̂ svichxis chuhmlukux̂. The church elder is putting up candles.
stakaanax̂ drinking glass 
Stakaanax̂ sul taangada. Take the drinking glass and drink water.
stiinax̂ wall 
Stiinam daĝan patriitax̂ inkakux̂. There is a picture hanging on the wall.
stiinam alux̂sxazaa blackboard 
Stiinam alux̂sxazagam kugan aazmukas akus. There are letters of the alphabet on the blackboard. 
stiklax̂ glass (window) 
Ukuusxim stiklaa chixitida. Put the glass on the window.
struuzal to plane 
struuzax̂ plane (tool) 

Hyaagax̂ struuzal qachx̂izigax̂ hitikuq. I planed the wood until it was snooth.
stuluvaayax̂ butter knife 
Stuluvaayax̂ stuuluĝim kugan akux̂. The butter knife is on the table.
stuukal to knock 
Uchiitilam ulaa stuukal angalix̂. He knocked on the door of the teacher's house.
stuulchikax̂ chair (Russian) 
Stuulchikax̂ six̂takux̂. The Chair broke.
stuulux̂ table 
stuuluĝix̂ table 
Stuuluĝix̂ chuqudakuchakux̂. The table is small.
stuuluĝim kamuudaĝii desk 
Ulang ilan stuuluĝim kamuudaĝii ax̂. There is a table with drawers in my house.
stuuparal to mend; darn 
Huyumis chuulkii stuuparal iĝamanatida. Darn your brother's socks and make it nice.
sugal to tell on; leak information 
Hlax̂ agitaadaan sugaasakux̂. The boy is leaking information.
suganĝix̂ young person 
Suganĝix̂ akuq. I am a young person.
sugas to chase 
sugatil to chase 
Hlas txidix sugas mikakus. The boys are playing and chasing each other.
sugdanal fancy; pretty 
Udĝiting sugdanakux̂. My ring is fancy.

suglal to make a mistake 
suglax̂ mistake 
suglayal to tempt 
Suglakuq. I made a mistake. 
Suglayax̂tax̂ kayutuzax̂. Satan is strong.
suxarix̂ cracker 
Suxaris angan chaayulgaax̂t. Let's eat crackers with some tea. 
suĝanal to do handicraft 
Suĝanal angalikuq. I did handicraft all day.
sukatul to be hesitant to go outdoors 
sukanal to be such that one is hesitant 
Sukanax̂ malgakux̂. It is a dreary day.
sukdal envy; be jealous 
Ayagax̂ ugiin sukdax̂takux̂. The woman is jealous of her husband.
sul take, grasp 
txin sul to shrink 
txidix sul to gather 
sux̂tal to hold; use 
suĝal be held; be used 
suusal take with 
Qigdaan ngaan suusakuu. He caught it with his hook. 
Ukinax̂ sux̂tal isikuu. He cuts it with a knife. 

Ayx̂aasix̂ suĝal ayx̂algakux̂. We are using the boat for moving. 
Sam chiidaa sux̂tal huĝnayakux̂. He is holding a pet in his hand and warming it. 
Itx̂aygim txidix sux̂tangis. The herd of reindeer is gathered together tightly. 
sulax̂tal to refrain 
Txin sulax̂tada. Refrain yourself.
sulil salt 
sulix̂ salted fish or meat 
Sulix̂ qanguusada. Bring in the salted fish.
suluxaĝix̂ barnacles 
Alaĝum achidan suluxaaĝis akus. There are barnacles down by the beach.
suluxs to be noisy; make noise 
sulgix̂ noise 
Masinas sulugikux̂. The motor is making noise. 
Sulgix̂ sadaadang malgakux̂. There is noise outside.
sumgax̂ big king salmon 
Sumgax̂ qam angunaa ax̂. A king salmon is a big fish.
suruupax̂ (asxum vintaĝii) screw 
Suruupax̂ ukuda. Find the screw.
susal tangle 
susalil untangle 
Imyaĝix̂ susalikuq. I am untangling the fishline. 

susil to hurry 
txin susital to be in a hurry 
Txin susida! Hurry up.
susux̂ pus 
susul to get infected 
Chang susukux̂. My hand is is infected.
susux̂s to file 
susuĝignas filings 
Ukinax̂ susuĝikuq. I am filing the knife. 
susuĝasix̂ file 
Susuĝasix̂ alanang liidax̂ alakax̂ hinga. It is not like the file I want.
sutul thick (liquid, gas) 
Ayangix̂ sutukux̂. The fog is thick.
suudaalux̂ knob (door or cupboard) 
Suudaalux̂ qahmigim daĝan akux̂. A knob is on a door.
suulix̂ salt 
suulidgusix̂ salt shaker 
Suulix̂ taĝayukux̂. The salt is salty. 
Suulidgusix̂ imdada. Fill the salt shaker. 

suun'gis tools; things; goods 
Suun'git taxsada. Put your tools away.
suupax̂ soup 
Suupada. Have some soup.
suuqux̂ red algae 
Alaĝum achidan suuqus alanalakaĝis. There is lots of red algae by the beach.
suuskax̂ nursing bottle 
suusxax̂ nursing bottle 
Suusxax̂ aniqdum ngaan aĝada. Give the nursing bottle to the baby.
svichxix̂ candle 
Svichxix̂ uhlii laampax̂takux̂. He has only a candle for light.
sviiniyax̂ pig; swine 
Sviiniyax̂ qalgadachxizax̂ ax̂. A pig is good food. 
T

taadaayux̂ flounder 
Taadaayux̂ qam ichaaqidaa ax̂. The flounder is a thin fish.
taagax̂ rip tide 
Akayum taagangis iĝanazas. The rip tides are rough at the pass.
taaĝan'gis lateral stalk of the cow parsnip 
Taaĝan'gis qalgazas. The cow parsnip is edible.
taaman then only 
taamaazagaan all the more; more and more 
Qaqadagumis taaman hitada. Go out only after you eat. 
Hlakuchax̂ taamaazagaan txin diikatikux̂. The little boy is getting to be more and more mischievous.
taamul to lick 
Hatining taamukuq. I am licking my lips.
taangax̂ fresh water 
kasakam taangaa vodka 
taangam idigaa pop 
taangam vidraa water bucket 
taangal to drink;, drip on 
taangaatul wanting to drink; wanting liquor 
taangachx̂il to water 
taanganisal to wait for geese or fresh water ducks to drink (behind a duck blind) 
taanganuuĝidal to taste flat (water) 
taangas, taangatil to fetch water 

taangatul to have much water 
taangulal to be thirsty 
taangulasxal to get thirsty; wanting to drink 
Taangaatukuq. I am thirsty. 
Taangam idigaa maazazanaĝulax. We never had any soda pop before. 
Taangam vidraa higakux̂. The water bucket is frozen. 
Alqul taangam hasinaa taangal hingamax̂t? Why are you drinking lots of water? 
Asxinux̂ taangax̂ taangal angalix̂. The girl drank water today. 
Aahmaaĝis taangachx̂il ii qilax̂six̂t? Did you water the plants this morning? 
Tayaĝux̂ taanganisakux̂. The man is waiting for game by the creek. 
Asuun taanganuuĝidakux̂. Your cooking tastes flat. 
Chiĝanax̂ hnux̂tal taangatida. Go to the river and fetch some water. 
Chiĝanax̂ taangatukux̂. The river has lots of water. 
Hlakuchax̂ taangulasxakux̂. The little boy wants to drink water. 
taankax̂ tank (hot water) 
Taankax̂ akinakux̂. The tank is hot.
taatax̂ father 
taataa his or her father 
Taatax̂ maamang ugii ax̂. Father is my mother's husband. 
Hlam taataa qaqamiiĝukux̂. The boy's father is hunting.
taatunal to be poor; not wealthy 
Anaĝix̂ matalakan taatunakuq. I feel poor because I don't have anything.

taazax̂ wash pan 
Taazax̂ chux̂taqas itakux̂. The wash pan is filled with clothes.
tachim (ulax) (not) yet 
Qaqadat ii? Tachim (ulax). Have you eaten? Not yet. 
Tachim haqatalakaĝing. I don't know yet.
tadal step 
Kugan tadakung. I stepped on it. 
tadaalux̂ mat; step
tadus surprise 
tadutil surprise 
Ting tadutikux̂t. You surprised me.
tagadal be new; be fresh 
Tagadaqadakux̂. It is no longer new.
tagal to land 
tagaalux̂ airport; air field 
Atx̂am tagaaluĝa iĝamanalakax̂. The air field on Atka is in bad shape.
tagalux̂ homestead 
Tagaluĝing hnukuq. I have reached my homestead.
taganil to be snowing 
Taganix̂ malgakux̂. It is snowing. 
taxsal to put away; to collect; to gather 
Qalgadax̂ taxsakus. We are putting away food. 
Tingin taxsakus. We are assembling.

taxul to tie; wrap 
Chimgung ngus taxul atxax̂ tiix̂t. Would you please wrap up my package for me. 
Yaasikax̂ taxuda. Tie the box. 
taĝal to try; check; learn; understand 
Ayx̂aasix̂ taĝada. Check the boat. 
Duurax̂ maqaĝiix̂taayulax taĝax̂taangan ax̂takuq. I checked to see if the dory was all right. 
Adalulgaa igiim taĝakux̂. He is learning to lie. 
Igiim taĝayax̂taqaa. He tries to learn it.
taĝayux̂ salt; salty 
Qalgadax̂ taĝayukux̂. The food is salty.
tax̂ now; well; enough 
Tax̂! Now! 
Tax̂ sanakux̂. That's enough. 
Tax̂ ii? Well?
tax̂s to get dark 
tax̂til to get dark 
Tax̂tikux̂. It is getting dark.
takal to come off; get loose 
takas to take off 
takatil to take off 
Takatikung. I took it off.
takdax̂ bump on the head; a cod bladder stuffed with cod liver 

Kamging takdaĝikux̂. I have a lump on my head.
talĝix̂ branch; tentacle 
Aaqanam talĝii adukux̂. The octopus tentacle is long.
taliĝil to dance 
Kiinkus as taliĝil saĝanax̂t? Who did you dance with last night?
tahlidax̂ knot in wood 
Hyaagam kugan tahlidax̂ akux̂. There is a knot on the log.
tamaakax̂ tobacco 
Tamaakax̂ imis iĝamanalakax̂. Tobacco is not good for you.
tamgaalux̂ white winged scoter 
Tamgaalux̂ tagakux̂. The scoter has landed.
tamsux̂ cheek groove 
Tamsung izanalakax̂. My cheek groove is easy to see.
tahmiigasis garters; arm bands 
Chuyuum daĝan tahmiigasis chux̂takux̂. He is wearing arm bands on his arm.
tahmladax̂ tobacco pouch 
Tahmladang hikitikuq. I lost my snuff box. 
tanax̂ land; island; ground; earth; place 
Piitram tanaa Peter's place 

qawam tanaa sea lion rookery 
tanam ulaa sod house 
tanam qawaa caterpillar 
tanaaĝal to return (by land) 
tanaanul to come ashore 
tanadgusix̂ village 
tanadgusilĝux̂ city 
tanadgusiigamax main town; city 
tanaĝil to have village on it; to have home on; to stay home; have room 
tanax̂tal to live at 
tanalĝil to bury 
tanasxa summer camp 
tanasxan ulaa cabin 
taanasxaadal to go camping; be camping 
tanasxaadal to go camping 
tanasxaĝil to stay at camp 
tanatul to be roomy; spacy 
Alaĝum ilagaan tanam hadan huyakux̂. He comes to the land by sea. 
Tanam kugan higitikux̂. He jumps on the ground. 
Qan'gim ngaan tanam ulaa iĝamanakux̂. A sod house is good for winter. 
Tanam qawaa kitakucham hasinangis matazax̂. A caterpillar has lots of little legs. 
Tanasxan saĝal hulakuq. I slept at camp last night. 
Tanaanul chalakuq. I came ashore (in a boat). 
Tanadgusing angunakuchaĝulax. My village is very small. 
Tanadgusilĝux̂ hnulgal aguun ulas qayal hasinazas. When we come to a big city there are many tall houses. 

Tanadgusiigamax hnukuq. I came to a city. 
Amlagix̂ tanaĝanax̂ ax̂takux̂. There was once a village on Amlia, 
Atx̂am kugan tanaĝikus. We have a home on Atka. 
Slum huzuu tanaĝikuq. I stayed home all summer. 
Ulax̂ tanaĝilakan. The house has no space. 
Atx̂ax̂ tanaĝakux̂. We live on Atka. 
Asx̂ax̂tax̂ tanalĝilgakux̂. The dead were buried. 
Tanasxan al sluzas. We camp out all summer. 
Tanasxan ulaa usxis ilagaan aguĝikux̂. The camp house is made of logs. 
Tanasxaadal aguun txin hnux̂tazaangan aĝnaq. I'll visit you when you are camping. 
Taanasxaadakuq. I am camping. 
Tanasxaĝikuq mal ukuĝalakan ukutikuq. The reason I wasn't around was that I was camping. 
Ulam nagan tanatukux̂. The house has lots of room.
tanahmax̂ warp; longitudinal threads in basket 
Isx̂atim tanahmangis agukux̂. She is making the longitudinal threads of a basket.
tanĝaaĝix̂ bear 
tanĝaaĝim chumnugii brown bear 
tanĝaaĝim qaxchikdaa black bear 
Tanĝaaĝim algam kayutuu ax̂. A bear is a strong animal. 
Tanĝaaĝim chumnugii angunakux̂. The brown bear is big. 

Tanĝaaĝim qaxchikdangis udang malgazaĝulax. We don't have black bears here.
tanĝix̂ island; islet 
Tanĝix̂ iĝamanakux̂ akux̂ aaliisizigalakax̂. The island is good but has no good land. 
Tanadgusim sadan tanĝix̂ akux̂. There is an island out there in front of the village.
tanix̂ forehead 
Taning tasx̂idakux̂. My forehead is shiny.
tanil to lighten 
taniisix̂ flashlight 
Aĝadgix̂ ulax̂ tanikux̂. The sun is shining on the house. 
Taniisix̂ ngus aĝada. Give me a flashlight.
taqil to turn around (boat) 
taqimixs to go zig zag 
Txin taqitikux̂. He turns around.
taqul to put arms around 
taqux̂tal to hold in arms; to hug 
Ayagax̂ ting taqux̂takux̂. The woman is hugging me.
tas to burst; erupt 
tatil to burst 
tatal to have burst; to have a hole in it 
tatxil to make burst 
Bruudnaan tatxikux̂. He punctured a hole in his boat.
tasx̂idal to be shiny 

tasx̂idayal to polish 
Alaĝux̂ tasx̂idakux̂. The water is glossy. 
Luusxis mulil tasx̂idatiix̂t. Scour and polish the spoon. 
tasul to shuffle playing cards 
Kaartas tasukux̂. He is shuffling the cards.
tataam again 
tatahliim once again 
tatahliiĝutaam still another time 
Tayaĝux̂ tataam ayuxtakux̂. The man goes out once again.
tatux̂ lagoon; pond 
Tatux̂ tasx̂idakux̂. The pond is shiny.
tayaĝux̂ man 
Tayaĝux̂ saĝakux̂. The man is sleeping.
tayal to buy 
tayanax̂ trader 
tayasal to sell 
Simuun ataqan yaablukax̂ tayal angalix̂. Simeon bought one apple today. 
Ulang tayasakuq. I sold my house. 
tduxs to knock on door; stamp on floor 

tidgis sound of footsteps 
tidgimaxs trample 
Tdugix̂ agux̂taqadaax̂t. Quit making that knocking noise. 
Tidgis tutax̂t? Do you hear the sound of footsteps?
txin you; himself; herself; itself 
txidix you two; themselves 
Anaan txin hix̂takux̂. Your mother is calling you.
tixs, tigil to press down; settle 
tixtal to lean against 
tigmixs to press down several times 
Ulax̂ tanam kugan tigikux̂. The house has settled down on the ground.
tiĝlax̂ eagle 
tiĝlaagamax mature eagle 
Tiĝlax̂ hakaatxax̂ igax̂takux̂. The eagle is flying high in the air. 
tiĝlux̂ scar 
Kitang kugan tiĝlux̂ akux̂. There is a scar on my foot.
tiĝyux̂ wild rye 
tiĝyul to pull off wild rye 
Qiigas tiĝyukuq. I am pulling grass.
tix̂il jerk 
tix̂mixs to jerk several times 
Slaĝux̂ ulax̂ tix̂mixtakux̂. The wind is jerking the house.
tiigilgaadax̂ kittiwake 
Tiigilgaadax̂ qax̂ qakux̂. The kittiwake is eating fish.

tiihnax̂ mound; knoll 
Qayam kangan tiihnas akus. There are mounds on the hill.
tiisichax̂ one thousand 
Tiisichax̂ tayaĝus ukux̂takuq. I saw one thousand men.
tiklaadax̂ finger-pull 
Ting as tiklaadada. Do the finger-pull with me.
tihmaqux̂ short tail of seal, reindeer 
Isuĝim tihmaquu unalgakux̂. The seal's short tail is being cooked.
tihnil to pitch
Pulaatxix̂ tihnikuq. I pitched the tent. 
ting I; me 
tingin we; us 
timas, tingis we; us 
Tingin hix̂takux̂. He/she is calling us.
tmadgix̂ Atkan mackerel 
Tmadgix̂ qunaliĝizax̂. The Atkan mackerel is striped.
tmagix̂ nereocystis
Tmagis alaĝum kugan hasinakus. There are lots of kinds of seaweed in the sea.
tmal to slip 
Qax̂ sunaaĝikung tmanax̂. I tried grabbing a fish but it only slipped. 
Tmachx̂ikung. It slipped out of my hand.
tmuusix̂ stick; cane 
Qaataa tmuusing? Where is my cane?

traapax̂ staircase 
Ulang sadan qankus traapas ax̂sxaqax̂. They put these steps outside my house. 
Traapas qayakus. The staircase is high. 
traavkix̂ dish towel 
Chahmam traavkii suda. Take the dish towel.
trubax̂ chimney 
Plitam trubangis saazalilgaakakux̂. We should clean the soot from the stove pipes. 
Trubax̂ qayakux̂. The chimney is high.
truuvkax̂ smoking pipe 
Truuvkaan imdaqadagumis truuvkada. Fill your pipe and smoke your pipe.
tudangalgix̂ rainbow 
Tudangalgix̂ ukux̂takuq. I see a rainbow.
tugaadix̂ urine; bladder 
tugaadil to urinate 
Hlakuchax̂ tugaadikux̂. The little boy is urinating.
tugax̂ fist 
tugal to strike; pound 
Alqux̂ tugal hingaliidax̂ agux̂tax̂ hinga? Why is she making all that noise pounding? 
Uĝaluun ngaan tugaasakuu. He struck him with his spear. 
tugamixtal to strike several times
tugidax̂ moon; month 
Tugidaagamax January 

Tugidax̂ tachim chx̂alakax̂. The moon isn't full yet. 
Tugidax̂ chx̂akux̂. The moon is full. 
tugix̂ diaphragm 
qam tugii fish diaphragm 
qawam tugii sea lion diaphragm 
Qawan tugigan qakaa qaatunazax̂. Dried sea lion diaphragm is good to eat.
tugil to be sloping 
tugitil to stretch hung up 
tugiidax̂ clothesline
tugimaĝix̂ long sandy beach 
Tugimaĝim ilan aygagikuq. I am walking on the long beach.
tuglal to feel; to touch 
Tuglax̂takung. I felt it.
tux̂il to target practice 
Tux̂ikuq. I am target practicing.
tukluxs to scratch 
tuklumigdal to scratch several times 
Sabaakax̂ txin tuklugikux̂. A dog is scratching himself. 

tukux̂ rich; chief; boss 
tayaĝum tukuĝulaa poor man 
tayaĝum tukuu rich man 
Kuluuzas ama tingis tukux̂ matazas. Both Indians and ourselves have chiefs.
tukux̂ sea bass 
Tukux̂ axitikuq. I caught a bass.
tukuulkix̂ ax 
Tukuulkix̂ ukul hixtuqas qilam ngaan aguda. Find the ax and make kindling for morning.
tulax̂ upper arm 
Tulaa adukux̂. His upper arm is long.
tulkil to grind; mash 
Kartuufilax̂ tulkikux̂. She is mashing potatoes.
tuhlutulux̂ bog; swampy area 
Tuhlutulux̂ tanam umduu ax̂. A bog is a swampy area.
tumbuuyax̂ float 
Tumbuuyax̂ alaĝum kugan hanikakux̂. The float is floating out in the water.
tumgax̂ ivory tusk 
Amgaadam tumgaa akux̂. It is a walrus tusk. 
tumsal to put in order; store 
ulam naga tumsal to put the house in order 
Imgaĝix̂ tumsakux̂. He is coiling the fishline. 
Imliin tumsadigatazax̂. She keeps her hair in good order.
tumtatul thick; round
Hyaagam tumtatuu akux̂. It is a thick log.
tuhmux̂ lymphatic gland 
Isuĝim tuhmuu aqis anuusada. Remove the seal's lymphatic gland and throw it away.
tunul to make a sound; talk 
tunux̂ sound; voice; word; language 
tunuĝilakan to be hoarse 
tunux̂tal to talk 
tunux̂taasal to talk about; speak 
tunux̂taaĝux̂ sin 
tunux̂taaĝul to sin 
tunumkal to talk; say something 
tununax̂ interpreter 
tunuugal to swear 
tunuulux̂ windpipe 
tunuzachxizas gospel 
tunuzul to talk cleverly; flatter 
Aniqdux̂ tunukux̂. The child is crying. 
Saakux̂ alaĝum ilan al tunukux̂. The king eider is cackling out there in the ocean. 
Tunuu tutaqang. I heard the sound of it. 
Tunungin agiitingis haqatalakaĝing. I don't know some of his words. 
Atx̂am tunuu tunux̂taasakux̂. He speaks the Atkan language. 
Chuqang nanal tunuĝilakaq. I have a sore throat and my voice is hoarse. 
Alax anĝaĝinax txidix as tunux̂tal angalix. There were two people talking to each other. 
Agitaadaan tunux̂taasakux̂. He is talking about his friend. 
Tunux̂taaĝulagada! Don't sin. 
Tunumkaazal. Tell a story. 
Aliĝis tunumkaazakus. The old men are telling stories. 
Ting tununax̂takux̂. I am his interpreter. 
Ting tunuugaasakux̂. He is swearing at me. 
Tunuuluun tutax̂t? Do you feel your windpipe? 
Tunuzachxizas hilalgakus. The gospel is being read. 
Tayaĝux̂ tunuzukux̂. The man is a good talker. 
tungax̂s hard; tough; strong; firm 
Tungaĝikux̂. It's hard. 
Tungax̂tikung. I made it strong. 
Txin tungax̂tikux̂. It becomes strong. (He gets established.) 
tungaĝayal to repair 
Ulang tungaĝayakuq. I am repairing my house.
tus to get to hear 
tutil to get to hear 
tutal to hear; to listen; to understand; to feel 
tutaqaĝil to obey; behave 
tutaatunal nice to hear 
tutxaqatul to have keen hearing 
tutxaqulal to be deaf; hard of hearing 
tutusix̂ ear 
Haqanaa tutakung. I heard him coming. 
Hix̂tanangis tutakung. I heard what he said. 
Haadanang tutakuq. I feel that I am getting better. 
Chaayas tutal txin qaĝatakux̂ hinga. She's happy listening to music. 
Chaayas tutaatunakux̂. The music is good to hear. 
Tutxaqulakuq. I am hard of hearing. 
Tutusix̂ tutaalazax̂. We use our ear to listen. 
Tutusing chutal anax̂ tutaakalakaq. I cannot hear anything because my ears are plugged. 
tutuunus hard roe
Adgayum tutuunungis lakuq. I am gathering some hard roe of pink salmon.
tutuutux̂ owl 
Tutuutux̂ tunul aguun ting inunachx̂izax̂. When an owl hoots it gives me the chills. 
Tutuutux̂ amgim saa ax̂. An owl is a night bird. 
tuuflis dress shoes 
Tuuflit chuda. Put on your dress shoes.
tuutx̂ux̂ dry stalk of wild parsnip or cow parsnip 
Taaĝan'gim tuutx̂ungis. They are some dried stalks of parsnip.
tuuhyul to be lonesome 
txin tuuhyunil to become lonesome 
Ting tuuhyuniimis aĝikux̂t. You will make me lonesome; I'll miss you
Txin tuuhyutal. He looks lonesome.
tuyuunax̂ village chief 
Tanadgusim tuyuunaa akux̂. He is the chief of the village.
uchxix eyeglasses 
Uchxix chux̂tazaqaliingan aĝikuq. I am going to start wearing glasses. 
uchxis rafters
Ulam uchxingis tungaĝikus. The rafters in the house are strong.
uchx̂ul to dip 
Hudax̂ chadum ilan uchx̂ukuq. I am dipping dried fish in seal oil.
uchigil to swim 
uchixs to swim 
Hlang uchigil txin achunil saĝanax̂. My boy got chilled swimming yesterday.
uchiitilax̂ teacher 
Uchiitilax̂ awal angalizax̂. The teacher works all day. 
Uchiitilax̂ awakux̂. The teacher is working.
uchinikax̂ student 
Uchinikax̂ qayahlikux̂. The student is tall.
uda this one
udan Atx̂ax̂ here on Atka 
udang here
udaax from here 
udaaĝal to arrive here 
udaaĝii this side of 
tanĝim udaaĝii this side of the island 
udaanul to be on the way here 
udamas do like this 
udamatil do like this 
udamatil isida cut like this 
udamatal be like this 
udangudaĝan in this direction; toward here 
udagal to go out to sea 
Itx̂aygis udaaĝakus. The reindeer arrived here. 
Ayx̂aasix̂ udaanukux̂. The boat is on its way over here. 
Udagakuq. I am going out to sea.
udax̂ bay 
Udax̂ qamdakux̂. The bay is deep.
udĝitix̂ ring 
Udĝitix̂ chux̂taatuzaĝulaq. I don't like to wear a ring. 
Udĝitix̂ adx̂uun daĝan chux̂takux̂t. You are wearing a ring on your finger.
udixs to divide; distribute 
Qalgadax̂ udixsxal angalix̂. The food was divided today.
udix̂s to sting; burn 
Chang qangax̂taa udiĝikux̂. My burned hand is stinging.
ugix̂ husband 
ugiĝiqadanax̂ widow 
Ayagam ugii stuulchikam kugan unguchikux̂. The woman's husband is sitting in the chair.
ugimgix̂ rock wall 
Hingan ugimgix̂ qayakux̂. That rock wall is high. 
uglaga another one 
uglagaan beside; in addition to 
Hix̂tanat uglaxtida! Change the subject!
ugluxs to shake 
Kamgiin uglugikux̂. He is shaking his head.
uguĝix̂ joint 
Uguĝining nax̂takuq. My joints are aching. 
Ugunilakaq. I am disappointed.
ugunul to forget 
Ugunuqatuzakuq. I am forgetful.
uguruudax̂ vegetable garden 
Uguruudax̂ agukus. We are making a garden.
ugutal: txin ugutal to be happy 
uxchux̂ tufted puffin 
uxchuudax̂ ragwort 
Uxchum hiiyukaa uluudazax̂. The puffin's bill is orange.
uxil to put out (fire) 
Nikulay unaaluĝix̂ uxil ax̂takux̂. Nick was putting out the fire. 
Laampax̂ uxida. Put out the fire.
uxil to skin (fox, puffin) 
Uuquchiingix̂ uxikuq. I am skinning a fox.
uxtil to prick; let out blood 
Chaaduudaan uxtida. Prick your boil with a needle.
uĝaaĝux̂ fluke; flounder 
Uĝaaĝux̂ ix̂txilgazax̂. The flounder is eaten raw.
uĝaanĝix̂ squall 
Uĝaangikux̂. There is a squall.
uĝal to go out; be extinguished; to be worn out 
ux̂al to be extinguished 
uĝax̂tal to be out (fire) 
Unaalux̂ uĝakux̂. The fire went out.
uĝalul to spear 
uĝalux̂ spear 
Chuxchas qas uĝalul lazas. Eskimos catch fish with spears.
uĝayaasix̂ medicine 
ux̂ayal cure 
Quyx̂im uĝayaasii ngus ax̂sxal angalix̂. They gave me cough medicine today. 
uĝii his 
uĝing mine 
ux̂tal own 
Hingan ukinax̂ uĝing akux̂. That knife is mine.
uĝlaĝul beckon 
Uĝlaĝukung haqanax̂. I beckoned him to come.
uĝlal thaw; calm down; get sober 
Taangalix̂tax̂ uĝlakux̂. The drunk sobered up.
uĝux̂ juice; pus 
aangsum uĝuu berry juice 
Apalsiinam uĝuu qaatunazax̂. Orange juice is good.
ux̂aasil to row 
ux̂aasix̂ oar 
Alaĝum ilan ux̂aasil txin taĝamaax̂t. You try rowing in the ocean.
uka the (house) in here 
ukang in here 
ukaax from in here 
ukaaĝal come in here 
ukangudaĝan toward here 
ukaaĝii: amgim ukaaĝii latest part of the night 
Ukaaĝal txin ungutida. Come in here and sit down. 
Amgim ukaaĝii qaxchikdazax̂. It is usually dark during the late part of the night.
ukaxs to fall back 
ukaxtal to lie on the back 
ukaxtil to lay on back 
ukaanul to go back to stern (boat) 
Chngatux̂ ukaxtal uchigikux̂. The sea otter swims on its back. 
Ukaanuda! Go toward the stern!
ukalĝa village in here 
ukalĝan here in the village 
ukalĝaax from here in the village 
Ukalĝan akuq. I am here in the city.
ukangax̂ stern 
Ayx̂aasim ukangaa six̂takux̂. The boat's stern is broken.
ukinax̂ knife 
Alganaaĝim ukinaa, ukinam ilagaan ignatuzax̂. A hunting knife is heavier than regular knives. 
Ukinax̂ qichiĝilakax̂. The knife is dull.
Uktaabrax̂ October 
Wan tugidam agalaan Uktaabrax̂ ax̂. It is going to be October after this month.
ukudigal good luck 
Ukudigal manaaĝinat mada. Good luck in what you're doing.
ukul to get sight of; to find; to get 
ukuchx̂il to show
ukudigal to be in good health 
ukuĝal be seen; be gotten 
ukux̂tal to see; look at 
ukux̂tanaaxs to look for 
ukux̂taazal inspect 
ukumal to watch 
ukuuĝul expect 
Braatang sunam kugan ukuuĝukuq. I am expecting to see my brother on the boat. 
Sunax̂ igulgakux̂ ukumal angaliq. I watched them pull the boat out.
ukus to be for some time 
ukutil do for some time 
Sunax̂ haqal ukutikux̂ way waaĝakux̂. The ship has been coming for some time and just arrived.
ukuusxix̂ window 
Ukuusxix̂ ngaan kam qayaagamaxsikux̂. The window is too high for him. 
ulax̂ house 
ulaĝil to have a house; to be home 
ulax̂tal to have as home; to live in 
ulalĝital to keep in house 
Tanadgusilĝum kugan ulax̂ alakuq. I need a house in the big city. 
Aĝadgix̂ ulaĝikux̂. The sun has a ring around it (forcast of storm). 
ulal to be turned inside out 
kangaa ulal to make a summersault 
ulax̂tal be turned inside out 
ulatil to turn inside out 
Itx̂aygix̂ kalulgakux̂ kangaa ulaamigdal qayax̂ utinax̂. When the reindeer was shot it went tumbling down the hill. 
Lukamachix̂ ulax̂takux̂. The glove is turned inside out. 
Lukamachix̂ ulatikuq. I turned the glove inside out.
ulĝil to go inside (by sea or tube like object) 
ulĝital to come inside 
Ayx̂aasix̂ ulĝital aqadaam hitiiĝutakux̂. The boat went inside the bay and went out again.
ulixs to rub 
uligaĝil to be wrinkled 
Bruukii uligaĝikux̂. His pants are wrinkled.
uliigis mukluks 
Tayaĝux̂ uliigis chux̂takux̂. The man is wearing mukluks.
ulugax̂ cheek 
Ulugaa humtakux̂. His cheek is swollen.
ulux̂ meat; corpse 
Ulux̂ unal qakus. We cooked the meat and ate it.
ulungtx̂ax̂ murre 
Ulungtx̂ax̂ sax̂ ax̂. A murre is a bird.
uluudal to be red 
Yaablukax̂ uluudakux̂. The apple is red.
uluung seven 
uluungidim seven times 
uluungidim hatix̂ seventy 
Siching ama qankus uluung ax̂. Four and three is seven.
uhlii only; it only 
uhling only I 
Uhling wang akuq. I am the only one here.
uman this one (invisible) 
achunakux̂ uma it is blowing 
Alqum ilgaĝii umamakux̂ uma? What is that smell? 
Umayangis. I hear them coming. 
umaaĝal to come in here (invisible)
umchul suck 
Taangaan umchuda. Suck your drink (with a straw). 
umdaagil current or wind away from land 
umdaagiilal to drift away from land 
Baankix̂ alaĝum ilan umdaagiilakux̂. The can is drifting away from the shore.
umdul to be swampy or soft 
Chugum umdugam ilan ayaaĝanax̂t! Don't fall in the quicksand!
umĝix̂ bait 
umĝil to bait 
Dux̂tang umĝilĝikuq. I put bait on my hook.
umĝuulus hard roe of Japanese perch 
Sx̂iigim umĝuulungis qalgazax̂. Perch hard roe is edible.
umlal to wake up 
umlax̂tal to be awake 
umlas, umlatil to wake up 
Hlax̂ umlatikuq. I woke up the boy.
umnax̂ rope; string 
umnal to bind 
umnal be tight (not leaking) 
umnax̂ agukux̂ to make tight 
umnayal to tighten (the boat) 
Umnakux̂. It is tight. 
Taatang ayx̂aasiin umnayakux̂. My father is caulking his boat.
ums to get the scent of 
umil to get the scent of 
umsiixs to sniff around 
umtal to smell 
umtaatunal to smell good 
Umtaatunakux̂t. You smell nice.
umsux̂ tongue 
Ithx̂aygim umsuu qaatunazax̂. Reindeer tongue is good eating.
unal to bake; cook 
unaalux̂ bonfire
Xliibax̂ unal qangatil agumis taaman hitada. Go out only after you bake bread. 
Unaalux̂ anida. Light the bonfire. 
unangaa side below; passage between 
Qatim unangaa aĝax̂takux̂. The crack is open.
Unangax̂ Aleut 
unangam taliĝii Native dance 
unangam uliigii boots 
Unangax̂ aadazaq. I speak Aleut. 
Kuustix̂ unangam taliĝii taliĝasazanax̂. Constantine used to dance the Native dance. 
Unangam uliigii igluqam ilagaan aguĝix̂. Native shoes are made from skin.
un'ginax̂ reliable 
un'gital to rely on 
Un'gitakung. I rely on it.
unĝa between 
Quganam unĝa qamdakux̂. It is deep in between the rocks.
unĝix̂ armpit 
Unĝiin qanang ax̂? Where is your armpit?
uniikax̂ story 
uniikal to tell a story 
Uniikakuq. I am telling a story.
unisal to wait for game to come 
Isux̂ unisakuq. I am waiting for a seal.
unuuchxix̂ heavy socks 
Unuuchxix̂ kitas huĝnatazax̂. The stockings keep the feet warm.
unglax̂ herring 
sildix̂ herring 
unglax̂ unangam tunuu ax̂ herring (Aleut term) 
sildix̂ kasakam tunuu ax̂ herring (Russian term) 
Unglas alanalakaĝis. There are lots of herring.
unglux̂ pinnacle 
Yaaĝim kadan unglux̂ akux̂. There is a pinnacle in front of the cape.
ungux̂s pull up (line) 
Imgaĝiin unguĝida. Pull up your fishline.
ungus, unguchil: txin ungus to take a seat 
unguchiilux̂ chair 
Unguchiiluĝim kugan unguchil ting hachiĝida. Sit down in the chair and wait for me. 
Achixaaluĝim ilan unguchiilux̂ anaa liidax̂ alakuq. I want the same kind of chair at the school. 
Unguchiilux̂ hingang akux̂. The chair is there.
uhngix̂ sister 
Uhngix̂ matazax̂. He has a sister.
uhngii his sister 
Hlam uhngii halukux̂. The boy's sister is sewing.
uqis. uqiitil to return 
uqidusal to bring back 
uqitmixs to go back and forth 
uqimudaĝan backwards 
Sax̂ uqimudaĝan uchigikux̂. The duck is swimming backwards.
uqlaĝil to bathe 
Aniqdux̂ saykam ilan txin uqlaĝil ii? Is this child taking a bath in the tub?
usal come off (hair); shed fur 
usatil take hair off; skin 
Itx̂aygis chngangis usakus. The reindeer are shedding fur.
usxix̂ bush 
usxim ilaa stick 
Usxis atakus. The brush is on fire. 
Usxim ilaa ukukung maasal tmuusix̂tal angaliq. I found a stick so I used it for a cane.
usx̂iixs to blow in 
Plitax̂ ilmudaĝan usx̂iixs. The stove is smoking inside.
uskaanax̂ rabbit 
Uskaanam tutusikix adukux. The rabbit's ears are long. 
utfiirkax̂ screwdriver 
Utfiirkax̂ angunakux̂. The screwdriver is big.
utxix̂ ashes 
utxidgusix̂ ashtray 
Utxidgusix̂ hyutihux̂. She spills the ashtray.
utx̂ul turbid 
Txin utx̂utikux̂. It is becoming turbid (overcast).
util go down 
us go down 
udusal take down 
utal have gone down 
Utal alaĝum achidan hnux̂takuq. I went down to the beach.
utma center of 
qan'gim utma middle of winter 
Qan'gim utma malgakux̂. It is the middle of winter.
utux̂ sea anemone 
Utux̂ quganam kugan chitakux̂. The sea anemone is stuck to the rock.
uviidax̂ lunch 
uviidal to have lunch 
Uviidakuq. I am having lunch.
Uvtuurnikax̂ Tuesday 
Uvtuurnikax̂ malgakux̂. It is Tuesday today.
uyaĝii opening; mouth; neck (of bottle); muzzle of gun 
Butiilkam uyaĝii ichaaqidakux̂. The neck of the bottle is narrow.
uyal to get; fetch; invite 
Uyaaĝukuq. I am waiting for a share of the catch.
uyĝuĝil to shiver
Ayagax̂siidax̂ achul uyĝuĝil hiing akux̂. The poor girl is shivering from the cold.
uyminal to be healthy 
Uyminalakaq. I am not healthy.
uyux̂ neck 
Uyung nanakux̂. My neck hurts. 
uyulix̂ head scarf 
Maamang uyulix̂ ngus aĝaazax̂takux̂. My mother presented me with a head scarf. 
Uyuliin chux̂tada. Wear your scarf.
uyus to vomit 
uyutil to vomit 
Uuyux̂chiikax̂ tutakuq. I feel like vomiting.
uubrizax̂ holy icon 
Uubrizax̂ inkakux̂. The holy icon is hanging.
uudugaaĝix̂ den 
Tanĝaaĝis udugaaĝim ilan chiidaĝizas. Bears have their babies in dens.
uuglix̂ coal 
Uuglix̂ qaxchikdakux̂. The coal is black.
uuĝlil to scold; call to peace 
uuĝliisal to forbid
Hlang uuĝlikuq. I am scolding my son. 
uulix̂ shallow cove 
Ayx̂aasix̂ uulim nagan changakux̂. The boat is entering the shallow cove.
uuquchiingix̂ blue fox 
Uuquchiingix̂ chiidachxizaĝulax. A fox is not a good pet. 
Uuquchiingix̂ aygagil amaanukux̂. The fox walks away.
uuznax̂ supper 
uuznal to have supper 
Angalikingam uuznakus. We are having supper.
Vaskrisiiniyax̂ Sunday 
Vaskrisiiniyam angalii kamgazas. We go to church on Sundays.
vidrax̂ bucket 
Vidrax̂ chiĝanam ilagaan aĝluda. Fill the bucket at the creek. 
Vidram qalaa tatakux̂. The bucket has a hole in it. 
viilkix̂ fork
Viilkix̂ tasx̂idakux̂. The fork is shiny. 
Viilkix̂ suĝal qalgazax̂. A fork is used for eating.
vuulnax̂ freedom 
Vuulnax̂ malgakux̂. There is freedom.
waaĝal to get here; arrive; come back 
waaĝax̂tal to pay a visit 
waaĝaasal to deliver; bring here 
waanul to be underway here 
Txin waaĝatikux̂. It arrived. 
Igax̂tax̂ chimgus ama aluĝis waaĝaasal ii? Did the plane deliver packages and letters? 
Waatxakuq. I am close to here.
wax̂tal to be possessive toward 
Aniqdux̂ kanfiixtaan wax̂takux̂. The child is possessive toward her candy.
wan this one 
wakus these 
waya right here 
waax from here 
wangudagam in this direction 
Wa! Here! 
Wakus ukux̂tada. Look at these.
waygix̂ blue mussel 
Waygis qaatunazas. The blue mussels are good eating.
hwaadal to howl 
Uuquchiingix̂ hwaadakux̂. The fox is howling.
hwaaĝis gun powder 
hwaaĝilĝil to fill with powder 
Saygiin hwaaĝilĝida. Put some powder in your gun.
hwax̂ smoke
hwaĝix̂ smoke
Hwaĝix̂ trubam ilagaan igakux̂. The smoke is coming out of the chimney.
yaablukax̂ apple 
Yaablukax̂ qaatuzaq. I like eating an apple. 
Yaablukas uluudakus. The apples are red.
yaagil to move
Tanax̂ yaagikux̂. There is an earthquake.
yaaĝix̂ cape 
Yaaĝix̂ sakang alaĝum ilan hitakux̂. The cape sticks out at sea.
yaakarax̂ anchor 
Sunax̂ waaĝal yaakaraan itxikux̂. The ship came in and dropped anchor.
yaalil to be slow-motioned 
Anĝaĝinam yaaliituu akux̂t. You are so slow in doing things.
yaarusax̂ skate (fishline) 
Yaarusax̂ itakux̂. The halibut skate is setting out.
yaasikax̂ box 
yaasikalĝil put in a box 
Yaasikax̂ alakuq. I need a box.
yaatal to be in range 
Kalulgaakaan yaatakux̂. It is at the shooting range.
yagnal to crave 
yagnanilgal to want very much 
Ulux̂ yagnax̂takuq. I am craving meat.
yaguuram kuufyaa wild geranium 
Yaguuram kuufyangis lalgakus. We are picking wild geraniums.
yaxtal to love 
Maamax̂ aniqduun yaxtal kumsix̂takux̂. The mother is carrying her baby and giving him love.
yas reef; strandflats 
Yas qakatikux̂. The strandflats are dry now.
yuuvkax̂ slip
hyaagax̂ wood
Hyaagax̂ qakakux̂. The wood is dry.
hyal floodtide 
Agux̂ hyakux̂. It is now floodtide. 
hyaligax̂ rising tide (current)
hyul to run (water) 
hyutil to pour; spill 
hyus to pour 
Arsiin mulukax̂ chahmam nagan hyutil ax̂takux̂. Archie poured milk in a dish. 
Taangax̂ hyukux̂. The water is being poured. 
Qalgadam signaa chahmam nagan hyus taxsada. Pour the rest of the food in a dish and put it away.
zaaril to fry 
Saahmlas zaaril hixchx̂il ax̂takux̂. He burned his fried eggs.
zaavtrikax̂ breakfast 
zaavtrikal to have breakfast 
Zaavtrikax̂ aguda. Make some breakfast.
zanavisxix̂ curtain 
Ukuusxix̂ zanavisxix̂ tachim alalakax. The window doesn't need a curtain yet. 
Zanavisxix̂ kimtida. Pull down the curtain.
zapuurax̂ fish trap 
Chugum hadan anĝaĝinangis zapuurax̂ qasiisazas. Northern people use fish traps to catch fish.
zavudil to screw 
Suruupax̂ zavudikux̂. He is driving the screw.
zaymil to borrow 
Xliibax̂ zaymida. Borrow some bread, will you?
ziilitix̂ vest 
Qinganax̂ malgakux̂ mal ziilitix̂ chux̂tada. It is cold so wear a vest.
ziirkalax̂ mirror 
Ziirkalam nagan txin ukux̂tada. Look at yourself in the mirror. 
zuulutux̂ gold 
Zuulutux̂ akitukux̂. Gold is expensive
